eased continuously over the past several
decades thanks to the dramatic improvement in meat production through the intensive
genetic selection for the growth rate and muscling, and the improvement in nutrition
and management over the past 50 years (Aviagen,
2014). The improvements in the growth rate, breast muscle size, and yield
in broilers, however, introduced serious abnormalities that influenced the quality
of breast meat. Some of the abnormalities such as pale-soft-exudative (PSE)
conditions and deep pectoral muscle (DPM) myopathy were known for decades, while
other abnormalities such as spaghetti meat (SM), white striping (WS) and woody
breast (WB) have not been reported until recently even though these conditions also
have been known for some time (Maiorano,
2017; Petracci and Cavani, 2012). All
the old and new abnormalities are associated with the dramatic improvement in growth
rate and muscle size, which affected the structure, metabolism and repair mechanisms
in poultry muscles (MacRae et al., 2006;
Velleman, 2015; Velleman et al., 2014).
      Although the incidence levels of the abnormalities vary widely depending upon
researchers, Kuttappan et al. (2016) reported
that the percent of broilers exhibiting WS/WB was as high as 90% and caused the U.S.
poultry industry from $200 million to $1 billion economic losses per year. This
review discusses the etiology, histological, physiological and chemical aspects of
the abnormalities. The impacts of the anomalies on the functional, mechanical and
sensory quality of the meat and their implications to the poultry industry are also
discussed.

      Pale-Soft-Exudative (PSE) Conditions
      The incidence of PSE is closely related to the increased susceptibility of the birds
to stress while other abnormal conditions are more related to the myopathies. A
genetic mutation in the ryanodine receptor of sarcoplasmic reticulum that regulates
calcium uptake and release is generally believed to be associated with the
stress-susceptibility and the development of PSE conditions in pigs (Barbut et al., 2008). In poultry, however, it
is not clear if the genetic mutation is the primary cause of PSE (Strasburg and Chiang, 2009). The PSE conditions
in chickens are mainly attributed to a rapid post-mortem decline in pH due to
pre-slaughter stresses and environmental factors (heat stress) (Petracci et al., 2015). Sandercock et al. (2009) reported that fast-growing birds
exhibited a reduced thermoregulatory capacity, and thus those birds are more
susceptible to heat stress during the pre-slaughter period. Heat stress causes
various problems such as muscle damage, acid-base disturbances, and reduced meat
quality. The broiler breast muscle is mainly composed of fast-twitching fibers that
are mainly associated with the anaerobic glycolysis (Yost et al., 2002). Pre-slaughter stress conditions accelerate
anaerobic glycolysis during the conversion of muscle to meat and lower muscle pH
while the carcass temperature is still high. The low pH and high-temperature
combination leads to protein denaturation and produces PSE conditions (Berri et al., 2005; Wilhelm et al., 2010). The PSE meat has an unattractive pale
color, soft texture, and low water-holding capacity (WHC) and protein extractability
(Barbut et al., 2008). Therefore, the
processing ability of PSE meat is low, and the texture of the processed meat
products is brittle and dry. The incidence level of PSE conditions is about 5% to
40%, and thus PSE conditions cause significant economic losses to the poultry
industry (Owens et al., 2009).

      Deep Pectoralis Muscle (DPM) Myopathy
      DPM, also known as &#x201C;green muscle disease,&#x201D; was first described in
turkeys and chicken breeders as &#x201C;degenerative myopathy&#x201D; (Dickinson et al., 1968). However, it has become
common in all meat-type fast-growing birds (Bilgili
and Hess, 2002; Grunder et al.,
1984). DPM is defined as ischemic necrosis that develops in
Pectoralis minor, and the genetics, physio-anatomical
background and the management of birds are related to the incidence of DPM. The
Pectoral major and the Pectoral minor are the
two muscles involved in wing movements. When the birds are nervous, startled, flight
and struggle because of feed or water outages, human activities, and excessive
noises in and around chicken houses, they prone to have sudden movements of wings
(Bilgili et al., 2000). In the turkeys
and broilers, Pectoralis minor muscle that raises wings during the
wing flapping expands its volume by about 20%&#x2013;25% for the increased blood
flow into the muscle. However, Pectoralis minor muscle is
sandwiched between the sternum and inelastic fascia, and thus cannot fully expand
during the activities. This generates pressure to the Pectoralis
minor muscle and occludes the blood vessels, and causes oxygen deficit
and develops ischemia (Jordan and Pattison,
1998; Sille, 1985). In lighter
birds, this pressure quickly returns to the normal state. In heavy birds, however,
the pressure can be maintained long enough to lead to irreversible necrotic changes
in the Pectoralis minor muscle (Bilgili and Hess, 2002). In the early stage, DPM muscles show acute
inflammation, edema, and hemorrhages. In the later stage, however, the conditions
change to degenerative necrosis with muscle fiber atrophy, follicular, segmental and
granular decomposition, macrophage infiltrations, connective tissue proliferation,
and eosinophile and phagocyte infiltrations (Fig.
1). In the most advanced lesions, normal muscle fibers are replaced by
fibrous and adipose tissue and the color changes from pink to green (Bianchi et al., 2006).

        Fig. 1

          Deep pectoralis muscle myopathy.
          (A) Early stage of DPM showing muscle damage and hemorrhage, (B) Later stage
of DPM showing muscle greening. DPM, deep pectoral muscle.

      The part with deep pectoral myopathy in breast muscle is trimmed off, which
downgrades the breast and causes an economic loss for the industry (Kijowski et al., 2014). Under commercial
rearing conditions, broilers and turkeys are relatively inactive, and the
Pectoralis minor muscle is not used much. Therefore, the
elasticity of the muscle compartment is reduced, and it is difficult for those birds
to accommodate the swollen muscle after wing flapping. The reported incidence level
of DPM varies widely depending upon the age of birds and genotype: Bianchi et al. (2006) reported that the
incidence of carcasses affected by DPM was 0.84%, but the range of total DPM varied
from 0% to 16.7% range. Considerable variations were also observed for early (range:
0% to 12.0%) and old (range: 0% to 5.6%) developing stages of DPM. Ross 308
exhibited a higher incidence of DPM than Cobb 500 (1.27% vs 0.35%). Lien et al. (2011) reported that the incidence
of spontaneous DPM cases ranged from 3% to 17% and was greater in broiler chickens
with a higher growth dynamic than those with normal growth rate. Badger (2011) identified 4.4% DPM cases in
chickens at slaughter and cutting up the carcass. Kijowski et al. (2014) reported that the incidence of DPM cases in
commercial slaughter chickens was between 0.02% and 1.9% in Poland.

      White Striping (WS)
      WS is characterized by white striations parallel to muscle fibers due to fiber
degenerations with fat infiltration (lipidosis) and connective tissues (fibrosis)
(Fig. 2). The intensity and the thickness
of the white stripes can vary from bird to bird. Kuttappan et al. (2012a) developed a classification system for WS based
on visual appearance: normal, moderate and severe. However, more extensive groupings
can also be used when necessary. The major histopathological changes associated with
WS include necrosis of fibers, degenerating and regenerating fibers of variable
size, loss of cross striations, mineralization of nuclei, hyalinization, replacement
of muscle fibers with fibrous connective tissues (fibrosis), accumulation of adipose
tissues (lipidosis), and lymphocytes and macrophages infiltration (Ferreira et al., 2014; Russo et al., 2015; Sihvo et
al., 2014). Kuttappan et al.
(2013b) reported that the WS was not associated with any systemic
infections, inflammatory, or stress conditions, but had increased levels of serum
creatine kinase (CK), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase
(AST), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). When the damages are acute or continuous,
and the attempts to repair the damages fail, satellite cells of the muscle tissues
become fibroblasts or adipocytes and lead to fibrosis and lipidosis.

        Fig. 2

          White striping on a breast muscle (A) and white striping shown on a
carcass (B).

      Kuttappan et al. (2009) and Kuttappan et al. (2013a) found that more than
50% (50.7%&#x2013;55.8%) of broilers had WS conditions at 59&#x2013;63 days of age.
Trocino et al. (2015) found 74.5% of the
fillets examined were WS at the gross examination, but 97% of the breast muscles
examined showed histologically damaged muscle fibers. Many studies reported that the
incidence of severe WS increased dramatically from 1.4%&#x2013;8.7% (average 5%) in
2012 (Kuttappan et al., 2012a; Petracci et al., 2013) to 25.7%&#x2013;32.3%
(average 29%) in 2015 (Russo et al., 2015;
Tijare et al., 2016), and to 75.5% in
2017 (Gratta et al., 2017), indicating very
rapid increase of the incidence levels. Also, the occurrence of severe WS was higher
in Ross 308 chickens than in Cobb 500 chickens (25.9% vs 7.41%), and up to 40% of
medium and heavy broiler chickens raised under commercial conditions had WS
conditions (Lorenzi et al., 2014).
      Feeding a high-energy diet produced birds with higher body weight and accomplished
lower feed conversion ratios but increased the incidence of WS breast fillets.
Higher levels of lipids and lower amounts of protein in diets also increased the
occurrence of WS in broilers (Kuttappan et al.,
2009). Bauermeister et al. (2009)
reported a higher incidence in broilers processed at an older age (8 wks old) than a
younger age (6 wks old) because of the higher body weight at older ages. More than
half of the broilers are processed at older ages currently (&gt;8 wks), and the meats
are deboned and used for portioning and further processing (Owens, 2018). So, WS in broiler breast fillets could affect the
poultry meat market significantly and result in higher economic losses.
      The occurrence of WS in broilers was reduced by controlling the growth trajectory
through feed reduction during the rearing period (Meloche et al., 2018b). Restricting feed from 13 to 21 d of age was
effective in controlling muscle fiber degeneration, but too early feed restriction
(first two-week post-hatching) had adverse effects on the growth of broilers (Kuttappan et al., 2012a). During the
re-alimentation period, however, previously restricted birds showed a compensatory
growth and the effects of feed restriction disappeared (Trocino et al., 2015). The broiler line with high ultimate pH
had a higher incidence of moderate and severe WS than the low ultimate pH lines
regardless of the sex (Alnahhas et al., 2016;
Muldahl et al., 2015; Petracci et al., 2013).
      WS meat exhibited a higher percentage of moisture, intramuscular fat and collagen,
and lower contents of myofibrillar and sarcoplasmic proteins and ash (Kuttappan et al., 2013a; Petracci et al., 2013). Because of the decreased total protein
content but increased collagen and fat contents in WS breast muscles, their WHC,
protein solubility and marinade uptake are lower than the normal muscles (Sihvo et al., 2014). The digestibility and the
quality of amino acids in collagen are inferior to myofibrillar proteins. Therefore,
the nutritional quality of WS meat is lower than that of the normal meat (Mudalal et al., 2014). The solubility of
myofibrillar proteins is highly correlated with the WHC (Warner et al., 1997) and the functionality of the meat (Bowker and Zhuang, 2013). Bowker and Zhuang (2016) reported that WS fillets had higher
ultimate pH and Allo-Kramer (AK)-shear force but had lower a*- and b*- color values
than the normal fillets (p&lt;0.001). Lightness (L*) was generally higher in the
WS than the normal breast fillets but was not always consistent. Some researchers
reported that WS had a significant impact on the visual appearance of breast fillets
and lowered the consumer acceptance of the meat (Kuttappan et al., 2012c; Mudalal et al.,
2014). However, Soglia et al.
(2018a) indicated that WS conditions did not have significant effects on
meat quality.
      There are a few other known causes of myodegeneration such as vitamin E and selenium
deficiency, exertional or exercise-induced myopathy, toxins, and tissue hypoxia in
poultry. Among those myopathies, nutritional muscular dystrophy (NMD) is
characterized with white-colored bands on the breast and leg muscles in the
direction of the muscle fibers, which is very similar to that of the WS muscles. The
NMD is associated with the degeneration of muscle fascicules (Netke et al., 1969) and its microscopic characteristics are
also similar to those of the WS (Kuttappan et al.,
2009). The NMD is caused mainly by the vitamin E and Se deficiency and
can be prevented by the dietary supplementation of vitamin E and Se (Walsh et al., 1993). However, dietary vitamin E
level had little effect on the incidence of WS (Guetchom et al., 2012; Kuttappan et al.,
2012b).

      Spaghetti Meat (SM)
      WS defect is also associated with another muscle abnormality termed SM (Sirri et al., 2016). While WS fillets exhibited
necrosis and lysis of fibers, fibrosis, lipidosis, inflammation, loss of cross
striation, and vacuolar and hyaline degeneration, SM is characterized by poor muscle
cohesiveness due to the immature intramuscular connective tissues (Bowker and Zhuang, 2016; Radaelli et al., 2017; Sihvo et
al., 2017). Collagen maintains the structural integrity of skeletal
muscle (McCormick, 2009; Purslow, 2005): intramuscular connective
tissues are composed of three layers called endomysium, perimysium, and epimysium,
which surrounds individual muscle fibers, the bundles of muscle fibers, and the
whole muscle, respectively. In SM, the density of connective tissues in endomysium
and perimysium progressively decreases, and thus the muscle fiber bundles become
easily disintegrated or mushy (look like spaghetti) (Puolanne and Voutila, 2009).
      The histopathological features of the SM abnormality share similar morphological
changes to other myopathies (e.g., WS, WB): Swatland
(1990) observed abnormal conditions similar to the SM in turkey breast
muscles and attributed that to the outgrowth of muscle fibers to their connective
tissues. Ahn et al. (2010) observed that the
perimysial septa of breast muscles in fast-growing birds were thinner than the
slow-growing counterparts. Muscles with both WS/SM conditions showed the most severe
histological lesions with increased adipose tissue infiltration in the endo- and
perimysial spaces and high intra- and extra-myofibrillar water content (Radaelli et al., 2017). Using NMR, Baldi et al. (2018) found a movement of water
from intra-myofibrillar to extra-myofibrillar area in SM. A higher proportion of
extra myofibrillar water in the superficial section of SM led to a reduction of WHC
of the meat. Both WS and SM abnormalities influenced meat quality, but SM had more
pronounced adverse effects on meat quality than the WS (Baldi et al., 2018).

      Wooden (or Woody) Breast (WB)
      WB is macroscopically characterized by bulged, hard and rigid muscles with a surface
hemorrhage (Fig. 3) and the presence of a
light-yellow viscous exudate on the muscle surface (Mazzoni et al., 2015; Mudalal et al.,
2015). Wooden breast muscle has a larger cross-sectional area (Dalle Zotte et al., 2014), and higher
intramuscular collagen and ultimate postmortem pH (Chatterjee et al., 2016; Clark and
Velleman, 2016; Petracci et al.,
2015; Soglia et al., 2016) than
the normal muscle. Histopathologically, WB is characterized with increased
degenerative and atrophic fibers, variability in fiber size, floccular/vacuolar
degeneration and lysis of fibers, hyalinization, lipidosis, extensive fibrillar
collagen deposition (fibrosis), and macrophage infiltration (Sihvo et al., 2014; Soglia et
al., 2016; Velleman and Clark,
2015). The WB lesions begin focally and spread as a diffuse form as the
age of the bird increased. Some birds showed markedly hardened breast muscle with no
apparent fibrosis histologically, indicating that fibrosis is not the sole factor
behind the hardness of the WB meat and the lesion is not restricted to the
Pectoralis major muscles only.

        Fig. 3

          WB conditions on a breast muscle and WB conditions shown carcass.
          (A) WB: shows bulged areas (arrow) and hemorrhage, (B) WB with white
striping: shows bulged area, white stripes, and hemorrhages, (C) Cross
section of WB muscle: white lines (arrow) are signs of fibrosis and
lipidosis, (D) WB conditions on a carcass shows bulged area, white stripes,
hemorrhages and yellowish viscous fluids. WB, woody breast.

      The birds with high growth rate, feed efficiency, and breast muscle yield are more
likely to develop myopathies including WB (Griffin
et al., 2018) because the muscle tissues outgrow the supporting systems
such as connective tissues and capillaries and change the structure and metabolism
of the muscle (Petracci and Cavani, 2012;
Sandercock et al., 2009). Muscle fiber
formation is virtually complete at hatch. Hyperplasia occurs during the embryonic
development and hypertrophy after hatch. Hypertrophy can increase the muscle fiber
size (cross-sectional area) 5&#x2013;6 folds (Dransfield and Sosnicki, 1999). The post-hatch muscle growth,
development, and maintenance are accomplished through the activities of satellite
cells. Satellite cells are multipotential stem cells that are heterogeneous
depending upon the fiber type of the muscle they are derived from and the expression
of cell surface markers. They are located between the basement membrane and
plasmalemma of muscle fibers (Mauro, 1961).
The satellite cells proliferate, differentiate and fuse with adjacent fibers but
remain quiescent after hatch (Moscatello et al.,
1998). The muscle fiber enlargement is accomplished through the fusion of
satellite cells into the existing muscle fibers that adds nuclei to the muscle
fibers and increases protein synthesis (Allen et al.,
1979; Velleman, 2015).
      The extreme hypertrophy, however, results in reduced endomysial and perimysial
connective tissue spacing (Velleman et al.,
2014). Therefore, birds selected for hypertrophy have limited space for
capillaries in the perimysial connective tissues area, which results in the
decreased size and density of the capillary network (Sosnicki and Wilson, 1991). Both large muscle fibers and inadequate
vascularization induce metabolic stress because the greater diffusion distances for
oxygen, metabolites and waste products make it difficult to supply oxygen as well as
remove the metabolic wastes and initiate muscle damages (Alnahhas et al., 2015; Alnahhas
et al., 2016; MacRae et al.,
2006). The low oxygen and nutrients from blood during the ischemic period
lead to inflammation and oxidative stress rather than restoring the tissues to
normal function. The re-supply of blood flow and oxygen to the ischemic cells lead
to increased damage to cellular proteins and plasma membranes due to the production
of superoxide by the xanthine-xanthine oxidase system and the deficiency of
scavenger enzymes to remove the superoxide and other reactive oxygen species (ROS)
(Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1990). An
excess of ROS within the muscle tissue is involved in initiating the inflammatory
mechanisms associated with the WS and WB muscle abnormalities (Mutryn et al., 2015).
      The main inflammatory cells found around the degenerative fiber are macrophages
(Sihvo et al., 2013). The activation of
macrophages in stress conditions creates a source of additional free radicals.
Macrophages use superoxide to destroy pathogens as their first line of defense.
However, superoxide (O . &#x2013;) is toxic to the cells and needs to be
converted to a less toxic form quickly by superoxide dismutase. If not combated by
the animals&#x2019; natural line of defense, however, the free radicals may lead to
more cellular destruction due to lipid peroxidation of the biological membranes and
compromise their structure and functions (Zhao et
al., 1998). Trace minerals such as Se, Zn, Mn, and Cu are important for
the activity of antioxidant enzymes, and play important roles in growth, immunity
and gut health of animals (Cemin et al.,
2018; York et al., 2016). Dietary
supplementation of those minerals in combination with antioxidants enhanced the
bird's natural defense system in the tissues, which are essential to combat free
radical production (Kidd, 2004; Midorikawa et al., 2001).
      Zambonelli et al. (2016) reported that WB
muscle showed different genetic expression for glycolysis, oxidation, calcium
signaling pathways, and proteoglycan and polysaccharide synthesis from normal
muscles. The RNA-seq analysis and the microscopic and biochemical studies indicated
that the localized hypoxia, increased muscle degradation, reduced glucose
utilization, increased intracellular calcium and muscle fiber-type switching are the
critical features of myopathic muscles (Abasht et
al., 2016; Mutryn et al., 2015;
Petracci et al., 2015). After the initial
degeneration, the damages to the sarcoplasmic reticulum surrounding muscle fibers
increase calcium influx and activate calcium-dependent protease (calpain) and
initiate necrosis. WB exhibited a significantly higher amount of free calcium. The
increase of sodium and calcium content changes the intracellular ion homeostasis,
and the increase of glycolytic activity lowers the amount of glycogen reserve in the
muscle, which leads to an increase of ultimate pH in abnormal muscles. Fiber-type
switching, from type IIb fast-twitching fibers towards slow-twitching type I fibers,
decreases the enzymes related to the glycolytic pathway and glycolysis (Soglia et al., 2016).
      The instrumental texture of the cooked severe WB was harder than the normal breast
fillets, and sensory analyses of the cooked WB showed more springiness and
cohesiveness than the normal fillets (Chatterjee et
al., 2016). However, the sensory texture attributes of WB were not
uniform throughout the entire Pectoralis major muscle (Aguirre et al., 2018; Brambila et al., 2017). Tasoniero et al. (2017) reported that the hardness of WB is related to
the extra water trapped in the myofibrillar matrix (myowater). Velleman and Clark (2015) suggested that the hardened area of
wooden breast muscle is related to the very high levels of decorin expression and
excessive collagen crosslinking. Decorin is a small leucine-rich proteoglycan that
is involved in collagen crosslinking and other functions including cellular growth,
collagen fibril structure, and extracellular matrix organization (Danielson et al., 1997). However, Radaelli et al. (2017) reported that the
replacement of the degenerated muscle fibers with connective tissue (fibrosis) was
not related to the muscle hardness. The activity of &#x3BC;/m-calpain decreased
significantly in WB during storage but the differences in the calpain activities
during the postmortem period was not the primary factor for the increased hardness
in WB (Soglia et al., 2018b). Marination
decreased the toughness in WB fillets but did not eliminate tenderness differences
between the normal and the WB fillets.
      Compared with the normal breasts, WB meats showed higher drip and cooking losses and
shear force for both raw and cooked meat (Aguirre et
al., 2018; Chatterjee et al.,
2016; Mudalal et al., 2014). Although,
the objectionable texture characteristics of WB fillets can be overcome by grinding
the meat, the compositional changes still can result in impaired functionality in
further-processed products (Bowker and
Zhuang, 2016; Mazzoni et al.,
2015; Mudalal et al., 2015; Tijare et al., 2016). WB fillets had higher
color L*-, a*-, and b*-values and pH than the normal breast fillets (Cai et al., 2018). Wold et al. (2017) developed a Near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy
for rapid and non-destructive detection and grading of WB in chicken breast fillets
and found that the NIR was a practical and useful tool for detecting and grading WB
syndrome in the processing line. They also used low-field NMR to measure WHC and
found that WB muscles had a significantly higher share of loosely bound water due to
muscle fiber degeneration.
      WB conditions have been found in several countries around the world, including the
United States, Finland, Italy, and Brazil. Although, the industry-wide incidence
rates for the WB muscle are challenging to assess, approximately 5%&#x2013;10% of
commercially produced breast fillets display severe WB conditions. Owens (2014) reported that 30% to 50% of
broilers at 56 days of age (BW&gt;4.2 kg) showed severe WB conditions. Gratta et al. (2017) reported that 5.1% of
commercial broilers were WB, while Cruz et al.
(2017) estimated up to 85.9% at 35 d of age and up to 89.2% at 42 d of
age. Tijare et al. (2016) observed up to
96.1% of WB incidence in broilers reared using commercial diets. WS often coexisted
with WB. The first WS and WB cases were seen at 10&#x2013;18 days of age, and the
prevalence levels increased as the age of the birds increased (Sihvo et al., 2017; Wold et
al., 2017). Myopathies are more directly related to the slope of the
growth trajectory of birds and the reduced nutrient allocation at 90% density
throughout the grow out period reduced the severity of WB. The quantitative control
of nutrient intake, however, had a negative impact to the performance of the birds
and processing characteristics (Meloche et al.,
2018a; Meloche et al., 2018b;
Trocino et al., 2015). Therefore, the
concurrent manipulation of dietary amino acid and energy density is not a viable and
practical solution for breast myopathies (Meloche et
al., 2018a).

      Woody Breast with White Striping
      Mudalal et al. (2015) indicated that the
measurements of height or compression force in the caudal part of fillets could be
used as a tool to discriminate between WS and wooden breast abnormalities. Both WS
and WB are observed in varying degrees of severity, and sometimes they appear
together in one muscle. WS and WB alone or together negatively impacted several
aspects of meat quality, including WHC and proximate composition (low protein
coupled with high moisture, collagen, and fat contents) (Soglia et al., 2016; Tijare et
al., 2016). The occurrence of both WS and WB is closely associated with
up-regulation of protein metabolism and the regenerative process to repair the
degenerative changes, and the down-regulation of carbohydrate metabolism (Kuttappan et al., 2017).
      Both WS- and WB-lesioned areas showed myodegeneration with a variable amount of
interstitial connective tissue accumulation (Sihvo
et al., 2014), which changed the nutritional and technological properties
of meat (Mazzoni et al., 2015; Mudalal et al., 2015), and negatively affected
the consumer preference (Kuttappan et al.,
2012c). Over 50% of consumers indicated that they would not buy WS and WB
fillets (Kuttappan et al., 2012c).
      The WB/WS myopathies have both macroscopic and microscopic similarities to other
myopathic conditions like hereditary muscular dystrophy, nutritional myopathy, toxic
myopathies, etc., but their etiologies are different (Kuttappan et al., 2016). Mutryn
et al. (2015) identified a set of differentially expressed genes involved
in myofiber reactions to oxidative stress in WS/WB muscles. Dridi and Kidd (2016) reported that WB meat is a result of a
metabolic disorder that is associated with hypoxia and oxidative stress.
Immunoglobulin superfamily was also overexpressed in abnormal muscles, indicating
the presence of the tissue inflammation. The expression of interleukin-1-beta
(IL1B-&#x3B2;), a cytokine protein, is vital for the angiogenic processes (Voronov et al., 2003). The low IL1B-&#x3B2;
expression level is related to the lack of pain symptoms in chickens affected by
WB/WS abnormalities because IL1B-&#x3B2; regulates the pain sensation during
inflammation.
      Both WS and WB abnormalities impair the appearance and the functional quality of
breast meats, but WB had a more detrimental effect than WS, and the adverse effect
was more severe when both WS and WB were present together (Mudalal et al., 2015; Tasoniero
et al., 2016). There are no published studies on microbial shelf-life of
WS and WB fillets, although both have higher ultimate pH than the normal meat (Mudalal et al., 2015; Petracci et al., 2013). The notable discolorations on the
skin-side surface of severe WB fillets after cooking and the white striations on the
ventral surface of raw WS fillets negatively impacted the purchasing decisions of
consumers.
      Although the selection for increased growth rate and breast yield played a role in
the occurrence of the abnormalities in poultry breast muscle, the genetic basis for
the incidence of these myopathies is still debatable: Lien et al. (2011) reported low heritabilities for DPM
(0.02&#x2013;0.1) and relatively low heritability for WS (0.19&#x2013;0.34). Bailey et al. (2015) also reported that the
development of myopathies has poor heritability and genetic correlations, and
environmental factors such as nutrition and management contributed more than 90% and
65% for the incidence of WB and WS, respectively. However, Alnahhas et al. (2016) reported that WS had a high heritability
(0.65) and also had medium to high correlations with body weight, breast meat yield,
and intramuscular fat (0.33, 0.68, and 0.64, respectively). Significant genetic
associations were also observed between WS and the ultimate pH of breast and thigh
meat (0.21 and 0.31, respectively), and breast cook loss (0.30). Chabault et al. (2012) found that WS was highly
correlated with the intramuscular fat content of the Pectoralis
major muscle (heritability 0.83) and suggested to use it as an indirect
criterion for the selection against WS.

      Conclusions
      The incidences of the newly emerging myopathies (SM, WS, and WB) as well as the
previously known abnormalities (PSE and DPM) are much higher in the heavy birds
selected for the fast growth rate and high breast size and yield than the
slow-growing birds. However, the heritability and correlations of the genetic
parameters for growth rate, breast yield and breast size to the abnormalities are
lower than those of the environmental factors that include nutritional density of
the diet, management, and age of the birds. Although, all the abnormalities
(myopathies) are different macroscopically they share many similarities in
histopathological and biochemical characteristics. Also, all the abnormalities share
the common initiating mechanisms &#x2013; muscle fiber growth outpaces the
development of connective tissues and vascularization. Many researchers have studied
the initiating mechanisms and the histopathological and chemical changes in the
abnormal meat. However, early detection and prevention methods for the abnormalities
are not known yet. Developing non-invasive biomarkers based on mass spectroscopy for
diagnostic purposes in live birds and a rapid, automatic detection and grading
system in slaughtering and processing lines can be of help, but they cannot be the
fundamental method to solve the issues related to the muscle abnormalities.
      The abnormalities in breast meat raise concerns over the quality as well as safety
and lower the consumer acceptance of the meat. In severe cases, meats with
abnormalities are downgraded, and the defected meats are often used in processed
products (e.g., sausages or nuggets) where the chemical composition can be modified
during formulation (Qin, 2013). However, it
only alleviates the quality problems (texture, color), not completely solve the
problems. In 2017, USDA (2017) announced that
the breast meat with the signs of inflammation (WS and WB abnormalities) should be
trimmed off. The meats with inflammation are considered unwholesome and unfit for
human consumption. Therefore, the economic loss due to the myopathies can be greater
than the impact caused by the quality loss alone. So, more fundamental works to
develop birds with no myopathic conditions or studies to prevent the initiating
process through genetic selections or management for the high fibroblastic
expression (collagen development) and angiogenesis may be necessary.

     