ity and early mortality from suicide
worldwide, is reported to be more prevalent in women than men (Bangasser and Valentino, 2014; Levinstein and Samuels, 2014; Thompson
et al., 2015). Until recently, depression was regarded purely as a mental
disorder that was treatable only by psychologists and psychiatrists (Plante, 2005). However, recent studies have
revealed that it might be associated with many diseases (Daskalopoulou et al., 2016; Lotfaliany et al., 2018; Milaneschi et
al., 2019). Additionally, recent evidence suggests gut microbiota to be
involved in inflammation, brain development, and behavior (Guo et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019). Therefore, in order to develop an effective therapeutic strategy,
we focused on developing the food sources including functional and nutritional
supplement that could alter stress induced behaviors and gut microbiota.
      Cheese is a fermented food with a long history (Prajapati and Nair, 2003). In particular, cheeses are rich in energy and
nutrition and contain proteins, bioactive peptides, amino acids, fats, fatty acids,
vitamins, and minerals (Walther et al.,
2008). Additionally, cheese has been reported to be effective in
anti-obesity, anti-hypertension, and bone health therapies owing to its ingredients
(Gomez-Ruiz et al., 2006; Higurashi et al., 2007; Kato et al., 2002). Milk from Jersey cows contains more milk
solids than does Holstein milk, which is advantageous in cheese production, and the
cheese yield from Jersey milk is higher than that from Holstein (Bland et al., 2015b; Jensen et al., 2012). Furthermore, the cheese and fermented
milk from Jersey cows' milk has been reported to be richer in calcium, phosphorus,
milk-fat, and -protein than those prepared from Holsteins milk (Yoo et al., 2019).
      In this study, we aimed to evaluate whether the cheese obtained from Jersey or
Holstein milk has the stress-reducing effect in terms of behavior and gut microbiota
in chronic, unpredictable, mildly stressed (CUMS) mice.

      Materials and Methods

        Mice experiment
        All animal care procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC) of Chonbuk National University, Korea; prior to experiment
initiation (2015-05). The mice (C57BL/6N), aged 4 weeks; were housed in a
standard animal laboratory with a 12-h light-dark cycle, and fed on a standard
diet during adaptation for 4 weeks. In the first set of experiments, 16 mice (8
weeks old) were randomly divided into 4 groups: a control group (not subjected
to any stress; NC; n=4), a depression-model group (subjected to CUMS
procedure; CUMS; n=4), a group fed on Jersey cheese following CUMS
procedure subjection (CUMS-JC; n=4), and a group fed on Holstein cheese
following subjection to CUMS procedure (CUMS-HC; n=4). Mice were given a
synthetic pellet LabDiet containing 14% fat, 21% protein and
65% carbohydrate (5L79; OrientBio, Inc., Seongnam, Korea) and provided
water ad libitum throughout the study. Gouda cheese was
prepared by following a previously described method (Yoo et al., 2019). For mice feeding, Jersey Gouda cheese
(JC; 44.19% fat and 26.71% protein) or Holstein Gouda cheese (HC;
39.10% fat and 30.17% protein) were ground by adding 5% to
standard feed pellets, respectively, mixed and fed to mice for 2 weeks. The feed
was freshly prepared and replaced daily, and the unconsumed amount was recorded.
The mice body weight was measured weekly. Following 6 weeks of CUMS, all the
groups were subjected to a series of behavioral tests. Only one behavior test
was conducted daily in the following order: sucrose preference test (SPT),
Y-maze test (YMT), and forced swim test (FST). At the end of an experiment, mice
fecal samples from all the groups were collected and immediately stored at
&#x2212;80&#xB0;C.

        Chronic unpredictable mild stress paradigm (CUMS)
        CUMS was performed by following a previously described method (Marin et al., 2017). Briefly, the stress
paradigm comprised of the following 10 types of irritations: 1) heat stress
(45&#xB0;C, 10 min); 2) predator sounds (10 min); 3) high platform (30 min);
4) food and water deprivation (12 h); 5) light-on overnight; 6) light-off
daytime; 7) crowding overnight; 8) bedding deprivation (6 h); 9) wet bedding (6
h); and 10) 45&#xB0; cage tilt (4 h), for a total of 6 weeks. All the
materials used in this experiment were sterilized to prevent contamination. Same
stress was not applied for 2 consecutive days, and 3 out of 10 stresses were
randomly performed. Mice of the control group were undisturbed except at feeding
and cage cleaning times.

        Behavioral testing

          Y-maze test (YMT)
          The Y-maze test was performed according to a previously study (Kim et al., 2007). Y-maze is a
3&#x2013;arm horizontal maze (40&#xD7;3&#xD7;12 cm,
length&#xD7;width&#xD7;height), wherein, the 3 arms are symmetrically
separated at 120&#xB0;. Mice were initially placed within one arm, and the
arm entry sequence and number of arm entries were recorded manually for each
mouse over an 8 min period. Valid alternation is defined as the entries into
all 3 arms consecutively (i.e., ABC, CAB, or BCA, but not BAB). The
alternation value, expressed as percentage, is calculated by the following
equation:

                Alternation&#xA0;(%)&#xA0;=&#xA0;[(Number&#xA0;of&#xA0;actual&#xA0;alternations)&#xA0;/&#xA0;(Total&#xA0;arm&#xA0;entries&#xA0;-2)]
                &#xD7;
                100
                .
                &#x2009;

          Forced swim test (FST)
          The mice were placed in a tap-water (at 23&#xB0;C&#x2212;25&#xB0;C)
filled glass cylinder (23&#xD7;12 cm; height&#xD7;diameter). Their
swimming behavior was recorded with a video camera. The test lasted for 6
min and the immobility time during the last 4 min, was later analyzed. The
time without movement except for slight motions to keep their heads out of
water, was recorded.

          Sucrose preference test (SPT)
          STP was performed according to a previously described method (Casarotto and Andreatini, 2007).
Following 6 weeks of CUMS, the mice were made to adapt to 1% sucrose
solution for 24 h, and were simultaneously provided 2 bottles containing
1% sucrose solution and tap water, respectively. The water and
sucrose solution were weighed in order to measure their intake after 24
h.

          Fecal DNA extraction and general microbial community analysis
          Mice fecal samples (following cheese feeding) were freshly collected and were
stored at &#x2212;80&#xB0;C for DNA extraction. The total genomic DNA from
each fecal sample (200 mg) was extracted using the QIAamp DNA stool minikit
(Qiagen, Germany) according to manufacturer's instructions. Microbial
community analysis was performed using specific primers (designed in
previous studies) (Yang et al.,
2015). The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) conditions followed were:
95&#xB0;C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95&#xB0;C (15 s) and
60&#xB0;C (1 min). Melting-curve analysis was performed thereafter, and
the CT (cycle threshold) values and baseline settings were determined by
automatic analysis settings. All the fecal samples were analyzed with
quantitative PCR (qPCR) assay, and the CT values were used to calculate the
proportion of higher bacterial taxa in the feces. The calculation(s) was
performed in accordance with a previously described method (Yang et al., 2015).

        Statistical analysis
        The values are expressed as mean&#xB1;SE of the mean (SEM). The data were
analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Statistical significance was
set at p&lt;0.05.

      Results and Discussion

        Stress reducing effect of Gouda cheese
        Cheeses are rich in essential nutrients and minerals (Lopez-Exposito et al., 2012). Additionally, despite of the
presence of high amounts of saturated- and trans-fatty acid, no clear evidence
exists that links cheese intake to any disease (Walther et al., 2008). Due to the presence of high calcium
concentration, cheese contributes to bone health and durable tooth formation and
maintenance (Edgar et al., 1982; Kato et al., 2002), it positively affects
blood pressure and helps in weight loss (Gomez-Ruiz et al., 2006; Higurashi
et al., 2007). Recently, it has been reported as a food contributing
to nutrition and health, in connection with diseases such as diabetes and cancer
(Apostolidis et al., 2007; Yasuda et al., 2012). The association
between brain function or mental health and gut microbial community, also
referred as the &#x201C;brain-gut axis&#x201D;; has been intensively studied and
it suggests that diets change gut microbiota, eventually affecting mental health
(Bermudez-Humaran et al., 2019; Martin et al., 2018; Perez-Pardo et al., 2018).
        Jersey&#x2019;s milk possesses higher fat, protein, and SNF ratios; than Holstein
milk. However, the milk yield is reported to be higher in Holstein than in
Jersey cows (White et al., 2001). With
respect to this, Jersey is regarded as a dairy breed, characterized by lower
milk production than the Holstein, but with optimal milk composition and
coagulation ability (Bobbo et al., 2019).
Therefore, its milk production serves as a major disadvantage in the dairy
industry. Recently, to address this issue, studies have reported an increase in
milk yield and milk composition by crossbreeding Holstein and Jersey species
(Ferris et al., 2018; Saborio-Montero et al., 2018).
Additionally, with respect to dairy production technology, studies have reported
to increase the economic efficiency by mixing Jersey- and Holstein-milk (Bland et al., 2015a; Bland et al., 2015b). However, with respect to cheese
production, associated with milk composition and coagulation ability; Jersey
milk&#x2019;s use has been observed to be more profitable than Holstein milk
(Bland et al., 2015a). However,
published reports discussing the differences in functional aspects between
Jersey and Holstein cheese are unavailable. Therefore, we attempted to
understand how Gouda cheese derived from Jersey or Holstein milk could aid in
relieving stress, and whether a difference existed between them, and if it could
lead to gut microbial changes.
        To investigate whether Gouda cheese from Jersey milk could act as a stress-relief
food, a CUMS model was introduced in this study, as displayed by a schematic
diagram (Fig. 1A). The body weights of the
CUMS, CUMS+JC and CUMS+HC groups were significantly less than the
NC group (p&lt;0.05) (data not shown). Changes of body weight were noted to
decrease in CUMS, CUMS+JC, and CUMS+HC at 4 weeks, whereas, it
increased significantly only in CUMS+JC, at 6 weeks (2 weeks after
feeding cheese) (Fig. 1B). Furthermore,
food intake increased in both cheese-fed groups, whereas, body weight increase
was observed only in the Jersey cheese-fed group (data not shown). For
behavioral evaluation, the YMT, FST, and SPF tests were performed to observe the
effect of cheese intake on cognitive function and depression-related behaviors
in depression model (Fig. 2). The
percentage of spontaneous alternation (spatial memory) in mice during YMT is
presented in Fig. 2A. A significant
decrease in spontaneous alternation was induced by CUMS, as compared to the NC
group (p&lt;0.05). Surprisingly Jersey and Holstein cheese-fed mice showed
significantly recovered the spatial memories. However, no significant difference
among other groups as compared to CUMS mice was observed in immobility time and
sucrose preference on FST and SPT, respectively (Fig. 2B-D).

          Fig. 1.

            Schematic diagram of the experimental design using mice.
            (A) Experimental design (B) The body weight change(s) in all the groups.
Asterisk (*) and sharp (#) indicate significant differences for NC vs
another group and CUMS vs CUMS-JC, respectively (p&lt;0.05). NC, no
cheese; CUMS, chronic, unpredictable, mildly stressed; JC, Jersey
cheese; HC, Holstein cheese.

          Fig. 2.

            The behavioral tests in chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS)
mice.
            Following 6 weeks of CUMS, all the groups were subjected to a series of
behavioral tests. Only one behavior test was conducted daily in the
following order: (A) Y-maze test (YMT), (B) forced swim test (FST), (C
and D) sucrose preference test. Asterisk indicates significant
differences between groups (* p&lt;0.05,
** p&lt;0.001). NC, no cheese; CUMS,
chronic, unpredictable, mildly stressed; JC, Jersey cheese; HC, Holstein
cheese.

        The effects of milk components on brain health have been described widely (Conway et al., 2014; Hernell et al., 2016; Verardo et al., 2017). Nagai
(2012) has reported that the risk of neurodegenerative diseases such
as Alzheimer&#x2019;s and Parkinson&#x2019;s disease, could be diminished by
milk constituents. Another study has reported that milk phospholipids intake in
chronically stressed men, ameliorated the stress-induced memory impairment
(Schubert et al., 2011). This
corroborates the YMT results obtained in this study, which were used as a
measure of immediate spatial working memory. Our result showed that cheese
intake improved the spatial working memory of CUMS-induced mice regardless of
cow species. We found in the previous study that phosphorus and fat contents
were significantly higher in Jersey Gouda cheese than in Holstein Gouda cheese
(Yoo et al., 2019). So the loss of
body weight due to stress was recovered more by Jersey cheese intake rather than
Holstein cheese.

        Changes in gut microbial community by stress and cheese intake
        Recent studies have reported acute and chronic stress to be associated with gut
microbiota (Guo et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Marin et al., 2017). Li et
al. (2019) have reported that mice receiving the fecal microbiota of
depression-induced mice, exhibited similar behavior against depression. For
testing an assumption that the effect of cheese on spatial cognition and weight
loss are associated with gut microbiota rebalancing, fecal microbiota community
diversity was analyzed. Fecal samples from CUMS model mice and other mice groups
were collected, and the relative abundance of bacteria was calculated from the
CT values. The composition ratios of the target bacteria are reported as:
mean&#xB1;SD. Further, to make it more clear and to directly reflect the
change(s) in predominate bacteria, communities characterization is presented in
the form of a pie chart (Fig. 3). The
community pie chart analysis displays community composition and species
abundance in the 4 mice groups. Bacteroidetes abundance in NC
group was noted as 16.38%, however, it was observed to increase to
18.15%; due to stress induction. Whereas, the previous increase in
Bacteroidetes of CUMS group was reduced to 16.39%,
by Holstein cheese. This finding corroborates previous reports wherein,
Bacteroidetes concentration was marked to decrease due to
depression and was increased by Bifidobacterium
adolescentis (Guo et al.,
2019). However, no significant difference in the microbial community
composition of the 3 groups including NC, CUMS, and CUMS+HC; was noted at
phylum level. Saccharibacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and
Tenericutes were not detected in any of the groups. Interestingly,
Bacteroidetes of the CUMS+JC model was noticed to
increase significantly as compared to that of CUMS mice (&lt;0.002).
Whereas, Firmicutes concentration in CUMS+JC group was
observed to decrease when compared to other groups. As a result, Jersey cheese
intake completely changed the microbial community composition of the
CUMS+JC group, as compared to other groups. In conclusion, cheese intake
altered the microbial community and improved the recognition (impaired by CUMS)
in mice model. In particular, present study suggested that Jersey cheese played
a beneficial role such as a stress reducing food, and provided the functional
ingredients. However, further studies on fermentation and the useful components
of Jersey cheese will be required for developing an improved functional
cheese.

          Fig. 3.

            Change(s) in the gut microbial population by cheese intake in CUMS
mice.
            The mice fecal samples were analyzed with quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR) assay, and the cycle threshold (CT) values were used to
calculate the proportion of higher bacterial taxa. Communities&#x2019;
characterization is also displayed in the pie chart. Asterisk (*)
indicates significant differences among groups (p&lt;0.05). NC, no
cheese; CUMS, chronic, unpredictable, mildly stressed; JC, Jersey
cheese; HC, Holstein cheese.

          Conflict of Interest

        The authors declare no potential conflict of interest.

      Acknowledgements
      This research was supported by the High Value-Added Food Technology Development
Program of the Korean Institute of Planning and Evaluation for Technology in Food,
Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries (iPET), the Ministry for Food, Agriculture,
Forestry, and Fisheries of the Korea (318090-03-1-WT011) and the National Research
Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean government
(NRF-2018R1D1A3B07050304).

          Author Contributions

        Conceptualization: Kim Y, Oh S. Data curation and formal analysis: Yoo JY, Ryu S,
Lee WJ. Methodology: Choi HJ, Kang MK. Software: Yun B, Ryu S. Validation: Kim
Y. Investigation: Oh S. Writing &#x2013; original draft: Yun B. Yoo JY. Writing
&#x2013; review &amp; editing: Yun B, Yoo JY, Park MR, Ryu S, Choi HJ, Kang MK,
Lee WJ, Kim Y, Oh S.

          Ethics Approval

        Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC) of Chonbuk National University prior to initiation of the
experiment (2015&#x2013;05).

      