/pmc/articleset/nlm-articleset-2.0.dtd">

      Food Saf (Tokyo)
      Food Saf (Tokyo)
      foodsafetyfscj

        Food Safety

      2187-8404

        FSCJ

      32231928
      6989183
      2016029
      10.14252/foodsafetyfscj.2016029

          Review (Invited)

        Shiga Toxin (Verotoxin)-producing &#x2028;Escherichia
coli and Foodborne Disease: &#x2028;A Review

            Terajima
            Jun

1

            Izumiya
            Hidemasa

2

            Hara-Kudo
            Yukiko

1

            Ohnishi
            Makoto

2

        1Division of Microbiology, National Institute of
Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo
158-8501, Japan
        2Department of Bacteriology I, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, 1-23-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8640, Japan

        Corresponding author: Jun Terajima, D.V.M., Ph.D. Division of
Microbiology, National Institute of Health Sciences, 1-18-1 Kamiyoga,
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 158-8501, Japan (terajima@nihs.go.jp)

          The contents of this article reflect solely the view of the author(s).

          Conflict of interest statement: The authors had no conflicts of interest to declare in this article.

        03
        6
        2017

        6
        2017

      5
      2
      35
      53

          22
          12
          2016

          31
          3
          2017

        &#xA9;2017 Food Safety Commission, Cabinet Office, Government of
Japan
        2017
        Food Safety Commission, Cabinet Office, Government of
Japan

        Shiga toxin (verotoxin)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) is an
important cause of foodborne disease. Since outcomes of the infections with STEC
have a broad range of manifestation from asymptomatic infection or mild
intestinal discomfort, to bloody diarrhea, hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS),
end-stage renal disease (ESRD), and death, the disease is a serious burden in
public health and classified as a notifiable infectious disease in many
countries. Cattle and other ruminants are considered to be the major reservoirs
of STEC though isolation of STEC from other animals have been reported. Hence,
the source of contamination extends to a wide range of foods, not only beef
products but also fresh produce, water, and environment contaminated by excretes
from the animals, mainly cattle. A low- infectious dose of STEC makes the
disease relatively contagious, and causes outbreaks with unknown contamination
sources and, therefore, as a preventive measure against STEC infection, it is
important to obtain characteristics of prevailing STEC isolates in the region
through robust surveillance. Analysis of the isolates by pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) and multiple-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis
(MLVA) could help finding unrecognized foodborne outbreaks due to consumption of
respective contaminated sources. However, though the results of molecular
analysis of the isolates could indicate linkage of sporadic cases of STEC
infection, it is hardly concluded that the cases are related via contaminated
food source if it were not for epidemiological information. Therefore, it is
essential to combine the results of strain analysis and epidemiological
investigation rapidly to detect rapidly foodborne outbreaks caused by bacteria.
This article reviews STEC infection as foodborne disease and further discusses
key characteristics of STEC including pathogenesis, clinical manifestation,
prevention and control of STEC infection. We also present the recent situation
of the disease in Japan based on the surveillance of STEC infection.

        Keywords: 
        Shiga toxin-producing E. coli
        foodborne disease
        infection
        HUS
        Japan

      Abbreviations: A/E: attaching and effacing, CDC: Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, CFU: colony forming unit, CNS: central nervous system, DAEC:
diffusely adherent E. coli, EAEC: enteroaggregative E.
coli, EC: European Commission EFSA: European Food Safety Authority,
EHEC: enterohemorrhagic E. coli, EIEC: enteroinvasive E.
coli, EPEC: enteropathogenic E. coli, ER: endoplasmic
reticulum, ESRD: end-stage renal disease, ETEC: enterotoxigenic E.
coli, EU: European Union, FDA: U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
FoodNet: Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network, FSIS: Food Safety and
Inspection Service, Gb3: glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide, HUS: hemolytic
uremic syndrome, IDSC: Infectious Disease Surveillance Center, LD50:
median lethal dose, LEE: locus of enterocyte effacement, MHLW: Ministry of Health,
Labour and Welfare, MLVA: Multiple-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis,
NESID: National Epidemiological Surveillance of Infectious Diseases, NIID: National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, PFGE: Pulsedfield gel electrophoresis, STEC: Shiga
toxin-producing E. coli, Stx: Shiga toxin, Stx1: Shiga toxin type
1, Stx2: Shiga toxin type 2, USDA: U.S. Department of Agriculture

</pmc-articles