iseases were thought to be caused by evil spirits, supernatural forces, or divine punishment, and rituals and sacrifices were used to get rid of them (Patwardhan et&#xA0;al., 2015, Peset, 2015). Infectious disease transmission was explained by influences including witchcraft, religious forces, earthquakes, comets, and meteors (Chakrabarti, 2010, Karamanou et&#xA0;al., 2012). In the mid-1800s, while it was already accepted that some infectious diseases such as smallpox and syphilis were contagious, ample debate surrounded the origin of certain illnesses, such as cholera and typhoid fever, and the miasma theory became the predominant model to explain cholera transmission (Tulodziecki, 2011). The miasma theory, still widespread in the early 19th century, proposed that decaying and decomposing organic matter generates new compounds that are released into the air and are poisonous to people (Halliday, 2001, Julia and Valleron, 2011, Tulodziecki, 2011).
      A critical step toward understanding the fecal-oral transmission route came during the 1853&#x2013;1854 London cholera outbreak, when John Snow, one of the founders of epidemiology, correlated cholera mortality with the water source. Snow applied for and received mortality reports from the General Register Office, and his conclusions relied on two different data sets (Koch and Denike, 2009). In addition to visiting houses affected by cholera to determine the water source that deceased individuals used, Snow mapped the location of their homes and that of the public water pumps (Koch and Denike, 2009, Newsom, 2006). Based on a map of 578 cholera cases that occurred in August and September 1854, Snow concluded that more deaths occurred near the pump on Broad Street, which in the 1930s became Broadwick Street (Koch, 2009, Newsom, 2006, Ramsay, 2006). This confirmed his theory about cholera transmission through contaminated water, contrary to the belief, popular at the time, that the illness was airborne (Shiode et&#xA0;al., 2015). While the city removed the pump handle on September 8, 1854, on Snow&#x2019;s recommendation, the epidemic was already subsiding at the time (Newsom, 2006, Paneth, 2004). The medical community was not convinced by Snow&#x2019;s evidence, and he continued to argue that the ingestion of contaminated water was the cause of cholera, a theory that was accepted only in 1866 (Ramsay, 2006).

      3.2
      General Considerations About Routes of Transmission
      Foodborne pathogens annually affect one-third of the world&#x2019;s population and approximately 48 million individuals or one in six people in the United States (Dhama et&#xA0;al., 2013, Kalyoussef and Feja, 2014, Schlundt et&#xA0;al., 2004). More than 250 different foodborne diseases have been described, and they may be caused by biological agents (such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa and other parasites, and prions), chemicals, or preformed toxins (Epp and Parker, 2009, Kalyoussef and Feja, 2014). Some foodborne pathogens, such as Salmonella typhi, do not have an animal reservoir and cause strictly human disease, while others, such as Escherichia coli or Salmonella enteritidis, may be transmitted to humans from animal reservoirs (see Chapters 5 and 7). Foodborne and waterborne illnesses are underestimated and underreported, and this is particularly true for infections caused by viruses, whose importance has been increasingly recognized (see Chapter 14). To a great extent, this has to do with the fact that many of the foodborne pathogens may also be transmitted via other pathways (Hall et&#xA0;al., 2008). Moreover, medical help is usually not sought for short-lived foodborne illnesses and, as a consequence, these are often not reported (see Chapter 2).
      An aging population and increasing global mobility are two factors believed to increase the burden of foodborne infectious diseases (Koopmans et&#xA0;al., 2002). Globalization and centralization of the food supply, and transportation of the food progressively farther from its place of origin, have made it increasingly challenging to investigate foodborne outbreaks (Kalyoussef and Feja, 2014). The lack of signs and symptoms in all the individuals who ingested contaminated food, the fact that people may not remember everything they ate during the period immediately preceding their illness, and the presence of multiple ingredients from several sources in many food products are additional considerations that make the identification of contaminated and contaminating ingredients more challenging (see Chapter 2).
      Several groups are more vulnerable to foodborne illnesses, including individuals with immunosuppression or HIV infection, transplant recipients and cancer patients, people with liver or kidney disease, the elderly, the pregnant, the very young, and people taking certain types of medication such as proton pump inhibitors (Lund and O&#x2019;Brien, 2011).
      While most foodborne outbreaks occur in localized areas, increasing numbers of outbreaks in the United States involve multiple states, mostly due to the rapid and widespread distribution of the food (Crowe et&#xA0;al., 2015). Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)&#x2019;s Foodborne Disease Outbreak Surveillance System revealed that between 2010 and 2014, the 120 multistate foodborne disease outbreaks reported to the CDC accounted for 3% of all reported foodborne outbreaks but were responsible for 11% of the illnesses, 34% of the hospitalizations, and 56% of the deaths associated with foodborne outbreaks (Crowe et&#xA0;al., 2015). Also, in May 2011, an outbreak caused by Shiga toxin&#x2013;producing Escherichia coli (STEC) O104:H4 was identified in Germany, and eventually it affected more than 4000 individuals in 16 countries (MMWR, 2013). An unusually high number of infected patients developed hemolytic-uremic syndrome, making this outbreak the most dramatic since enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) was identified as a cause of human illness (Beutin and Martin, 2012). While initial investigations implicated mixed raw sprouts from a farm in Germany, subsequent investigations identified the source of the outbreak in a lot of fenugreek seeds that had been imported from Egypt (MMWR, 2013) (see Chapter 7).
      Food contamination may occur at several steps, including the environment where animals are raised and plants are grown and harvested; during the production process such as transportation, processing, or handling; or as a result of cross-contamination from individuals preparing the food or eating it (Hall et&#xA0;al., 2008). For example, transportation and social stress increase the fecal excretion of S. typhimurium in pigs (Callaway et&#xA0;al., 2006, Marg et&#xA0;al., 2001). This is explained by the ability of the bacteria to respond to host stress-related catecholamines by activating growth and virulence gene expression (Bearson and Bearson, 2008, Stevens et&#xA0;al., 2009).
      To schematize the routes that fecal-oral pathogens may take through the environment to reach a new host, the F-diagram was developed. This model promotes the view that diarrheal disease could be transmitted through food, flies, fields, fingers, and fluids and played a key role in developing a framework for the multiple pathways of environmental transmission of infectious diseases (Curtis et&#xA0;al., 2000, Eisenberg et&#xA0;al., 2012, Kawata, 1978, Wagner and Lanoix, 1958). Most pathogens that are excreted into the environment usually die. However, some of them reach fingers, fluids, new hosts such as flies, and floor or surfaces that are used for food preparation or eating. From any of these sites, pathogens may reach food and infect a new human host. All these transmission routes can be blocked by changes in domestic hygiene practices (Curtis et&#xA0;al., 2000). This model envisions two types of barriers to reduce disease transmission. Preventing transmission at the level of the primary barriers prevents the entry of the pathogens into the environment, and these initiatives are the most effective interventions to prevent disease transmission. Preventing transmission at the level of the secondary barriers involves initiatives that prevent pathogens that have already entered the environment from multiplying and reaching new hosts (Curtis et&#xA0;al., 2000).

      3.3
      Irrigation Water
      Because water is an important part of food production, processing, and preparation, pathogens can be transmitted by sewage or contaminated water that is used for irrigation or for washing or preparing food (Kalyoussef and Feja, 2014). Survival of pathogens in the irrigation water depends on the level of contamination and is generally better for helminths and viruses, which may remain viable outside a human host for months to years, than for bacteria and protozoans (Steele and Odumeru, 2004). A study that examined the transfer of Listeria innocua from the soil to the edible parts of lettuce revealed that the bacteria survived in the soil for at least 9 weeks during the spring. Survival rates were comparable when the bacteria were introduced via either the compost or surface irrigation. Bacteria were transferred to the edible part of the plant, but it was not clear whether this transfer occurred by direct contact, internalization or through vectors (Oliveira et&#xA0;al., 2011) (see Chapter 12). In a large outbreak of verotoxin-producing E. coli that occurred in 2005 in Sweden, in which 135 individuals became ill including 11 individuals who developed hemolytic-uremic syndrome, lettuce emerged as the most likely cause of illness. Water samples used for irrigation tested positive for the stx2 gene, and bacteria from the affected individuals had an identical pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern with the ones isolated from cattle upstream from the irrigation point (Soderstrom et&#xA0;al., 2008). In another outbreak, a Salmonella Newport strain was implicated in a 2002 outbreak that affected 510 individuals from 26 states in the United States, and the same strain was implicated in a 2005 outbreak that affected people in 16 states. A case&#x2013;control study conducted during the second outbreak identified eating tomatoes as being associated with illness. The tomatoes were traced back to the eastern shore of Virginia, where the same strain was isolated from pond water that had been used for irrigation (Greene et&#xA0;al., 2008) (see Chapter 5).
      From contaminated water or soil, E. coli and Salmonella were shown to be taken up into lettuce leaves (Franz et&#xA0;al., 2007), and E. coli O157:H7 sprayed on the leaves of field-grown lettuce was internalized into the leaves (Erickson et&#xA0;al., 2010). It is relevant that E. coli from cattle, sheep, and pig feces can survive on grass for at least 5&#x2013;6&#xA0;months, providing opportunities to contaminate animals, plants, or water (Avery et&#xA0;al., 2004). A study that used immunofluorescence and scanning electron microscopy reported that after radish seeds were experimentally contaminated with E. coli O157:H7, the bacteria could be detected on the outer surfaces and in the inner tissues of the cotyledons and in stomata (Itoh et&#xA0;al., 1998). Escherichia coli O157:H7 was transmitted from manure-contaminated soil and irrigation water to lettuce plants, and viable bacteria could be recovered from the inner tissues (Solomon et&#xA0;al., 2002). A study that grew radishes in soil inoculated with Listeria monocytogenes reported that some of the samples were positive for the bacterium for 3 months later (Van Renterghem et&#xA0;al., 1991). Another study revealed that when soil was inoculated with murine norovirus and Tulane virus, surrogates for human norovirus, the viruses became internalized via the roots and reached the leaf and fruit portion of strawberry plants (DiCaprio et&#xA0;al., 2015).
      A multinational study conducted in the Czech Republic, Finland, Poland, and Serbia examined the food chain for contamination routes by monitoring for a panel of human and animal enteric viruses. During this study, samples were collected from irrigation water, animal feces, food handlers&#x2019; hands, toilets on farms, conveyor belts at processing plants, and raspberries or strawberries at points of sale. Human adenovirus was found in samples from irrigation water, toilets, and a swab from a food handler&#x2019;s hand and on raspberries and strawberries at the point of sale. The presence of the virus both in the irrigation water and on food handler&#x2019;s hands indicated that these could act as vehicles allowing human pathogenic viruses to enter the food chain (Maunula et&#xA0;al., 2013), although food-associated adenovirus outbreaks are currently unknown (see Chapter 14).

      In May 2000, 20 individuals from a scout camp in New Deer Agricultural Showground, United Kingdom, developed an outbreak caused by E. coli O157. An investigation revealed that about 300 sheep have been grazing the pasture, and a test on 28 animals revealed that 17 of them shed E. coli O157. Isolates from animal, human, and environmental sources were indistinguishable by PFGE, and in&#xA0;vitro studies revealed that the bacteria can survive in the field for approximately 105&#xA0;days (Ogden et&#xA0;al., 2002).

      3.4
      Zoonotic Transmission
      Many pathogens that cause foodborne illnesses can be transmitted directly from animals to humans. For example, Taenia solium is endemic in most of the world (Gilman et&#xA0;al., 2012). Humans are the only T. solium definitive hosts, and they carry the adult tapeworm in the intestine, while pigs are the intermediate hosts and they are infected with the larval stages, usually in the muscle (Coral-Almeida et&#xA0;al., 2015) (see Chapter 15). Humans can become infected during the &#x201C;normal cycle&#x201D; of the tapeworm, by ingesting contaminated raw or undercooked pork, and develop teniasis (Del Brutto, 2013, Murrell, 2013, Wu et&#xA0;al., 2016). Pigs develop porcine cysticercosis by ingesting viable T. solium eggs contained in the feces of human tapeworm carriers (Coral-Almeida et&#xA0;al., 2015). During the &#x201C;aberrant transmission,&#x201D; for example as a result of improper food handling by tenia carriers, humans may accidentally ingest T. solium eggs by fecal contamination, become the intermediate host, and develop human cysticercosis (Del Brutto, 2013, Garcia and Del Brutto, 2000).
      While foodborne and waterborne transmission are frequently implicated in hepatitis E outbreaks (see Chapter 14), pigs and other animals are recognized as a reservoir for the virus, and direct contact with animals or consumption of animal products has been linked to human infections (Casas and Martin, 2010, Cossaboom et&#xA0;al., 2016, Meng, 2013). Rotaviruses can also be transmitted from animals to humans (see Chapter 14), and this is supported by experimental and epidemiological evidence (Cook et&#xA0;al., 2004).
      The foodborne transmission of another zoonosis came into the spotlight in 1986, when a bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) epidemic affected about 200,000 cattle in Great Britain, Ireland, several other European countries, Japan, and Canada. In the United Kingdom, the epidemic peaked in January 1993 and then subsided drastically (Nathanson et&#xA0;al., 1997). The infectious agent was thought to originate in cattle from the meat and bone meal (MBM), the protein-rich supplement regularly fed to cattle at the beginning of their weaning, and the total MBM ban in the wake of the outbreak reduced the spread of BSE (de Vos and Heres, 2009). Contamination of the MBM appears to have been initiated by the incomplete inactivation of the agent of scrapie, a fatal prion-caused neurodegenerative disease that has been recognized in sheep from Britain for over 250&#xA0;years (Nathanson et&#xA0;al., 1997, Taylor and Woodgate, 2003, Woolhouse et&#xA0;al., 2001). Meat and bone meal has been regularly fed to adult cattle, especially dairy cows, for at least half of the 20th century, especially after 1970, in Europe and the United States (Ramasamy, 2004). Meat and bone meal administration in larger amounts to dairy cattle than to beef cattle explains the significantly higher incidence of BSE in dairy cows in the United Kingdom outbreak (Bradley and Wilesmith, 1993).
      Prions resist conventional procedures to inactivate viruses and are extremely resistant to disinfection, sterilization, UV radiation, formalin, and acidic conditions (Dormont, 2002, Gibbs et&#xA0;al., 1978, Giles et&#xA0;al., 2008, Jung et&#xA0;al., 2003, Prusiner, 1998). They survive 200&#xB0;C dry heat for 1&#x2013;2&#xA0;h (Jung et&#xA0;al., 2003) and boiling for 15&#xA0;min in 5% SDS at a neutral pH (Taylor, 1999), and 2&#xA0;mol/L sodium hydroxide causes substantial but incomplete inactivation (Taylor, 1999).
      When cattle are killed, rendering is used to separate the melted fat (tallow) from the animal tissues. Conventionally, this process has used heat, which also has a sterilizing effect (Nathanson et&#xA0;al., 1997, Taylor and Woodgate, 2003). Over a century ago, it was found that the protein-rich material that remains after extracting the tallow can be used as a dietary supplement for animals (Taylor and Woodgate, 2003). Separating tallow from animal tissues requires organic solvents and a high-energy input, and this process has become inefficient after fuel prices increased in the 1970s. This, along with more stringent health and safety regulations, led to a decline in the use of organic solvent for extraction. This, together with the change from high-temperature batch rendering to lower-temperature continuous processing, allowed the infectious agent to better survive the rendering process (Almond, 1998, Brewer, 2001, Nathanson et&#xA0;al., 1997). After the proportion of MBM that was prepared with fat solvents declined between the mid-1970s and the early 1980s from 70% to 10%, the less-effective inactivation of the prion protein is thought to have resulted in the first batches of MBM being contaminated (Almond, 1998, Nathanson et&#xA0;al., 1997). These factors are thought to have allowed prions, which are resistant to heat but can be inactivated by lipid solvents, to maintain their infectivity (Brewer, 2001). This gradual elimination of the solvent step did not occur in the United States, where rendering has used high-temperature treatment of the fatty tissues, and organic solvents have not been used (Brewer, 2001). The relevance of the solvent extraction step is also illustrated by the example from Scotland, where solvent extraction has not been discontinued and the rate of BSE was low. While 12.6% of the dairy herds from southern England had BSE in 1988&#x2013;1989, this percentage was only 1.8% in Scotland (Nathanson et&#xA0;al., 1997).
      Dietary exposure of humans to the BSE agent was implicated in the variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob (vCJD) disease, first reported in the United Kingdom in 1996 (Grobben et&#xA0;al., 2005). Strong epidemiological and laboratory evidence, including strain typing, revealed that BSE and human vCJD were caused by the same prion variant (Collinge et&#xA0;al., 1996, Brown et&#xA0;al., 2001, Belay and Schonberger, 2002, Collee et&#xA0;al., 2006).
      Prion diseases are caused by the accumulation in the brain of PrPSc, an abnormal isoform of the host cellular prion protein PrPC. The two proteins have identical amino acid sequences but differ in their secondary structures, with PrPSc having a higher beta-sheet and a lower alpha-helix content than PrPC
(Liemann and Glockshuber, 1998). One of the genetic susceptibility factors to prion diseases in humans is a polymorphism at position 129 of the PRNP gene. Either a methionine or a valine can be found at this position. As of 2011, all but one individual who developed vCJD were homozygous at codon 129 for methionine, and a single heterozygous individual was reported (Mead et&#xA0;al., 2009, Colby and Prusiner, 2011). Another transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, kuru, a neurodegenerative disease described in Papua New Guinea, had an incubation period sometimes exceeding 50&#xA0;years and was transmitted by ritualistic endocannibalism (which refers to the eating of relatives, as opposed to the eating of enemies, known as exocannibalism) (Gajdusek, 1977, Colby and Prusiner, 2011, Liberski, 2013). Kuru was restricted to members of the For&#xE9; linguistic group and neighboring groups but did not affect groups into which the kuru-affected people did not intermarry. In the For&#xE9; language, the word &#x201C;kuru&#x201D; means &#x201C;to tremble with fear or cold&#x201D; (Liberski, 2013). The incidence of kuru started to decline after the 1950s when endocannibalism had gradually stopped (Collinge et&#xA0;al., 2006). Studies that examined the molecular genetic basis of susceptibility to kuru found that homozygotes for methionine at codon 129 were overrepresented in the younger age group, while valine homozygotes and heterozygotes were overrepresented in the much older age group, and survivors were almost never carried homozygotes for methionine at this position (Liberski, 2013). Heterozygosity at this codon was associated with older patients and with longer incubation times (Mead et&#xA0;al., 2008). It is thought that heterozygotes were protected from disease by the more difficult interactions between the protein heterodimers, while the homologous protein&#x2013;protein interactions made homozygotes more susceptible to disease (Palmer et&#xA0;al., 1991).

      3.5
      Foodborne Pathogens Transmitted Through Insects
      Insects are well-recognized vectors for foodborne pathogens. Their association with decaying matter, along with their endophily (the ability to enter buildings) and synanthropy (the cohabitation with humans), are behaviors that make flies, cockroaches, and ants particularly relevant for their ability to transmit foodborne illnesses (Pava-Ripoll et&#xA0;al., 2015). A study of ant communities at a municipal hospital from Brazil found several bacterial species, including Escherichia and Salmonella, associated with ants (Pesquero et&#xA0;al., 2008). Another study trapped cockroaches in multiple buildings in Spain and found several bacterial species, including Salmonella (hospital), E. coli (food-industry plant and home care), and Enterobacter (hospital, catering establishment, grocery stores, and food-industry plant), associated with the insects (Garcia et&#xA0;al., 2012). The examination of cockroaches collected at hospitals, houses, grocery stores, animal sheds, and restaurants from the South Kanara District in southwestern India revealed that more than 4% harbored several Salmonella strains (Devi and Murray, 1991).

      Knowledge about the food-related health risks of flies is relatively limited but, overall, a 3-fold higher prevalence of foodborne pathogens was found in the guts compared with the body surface of several fly species (Pava-Ripoll et&#xA0;al., 2012). House flies may contribute to pathogen dispersal in four different ways: through body hairs and surface, through the glandular hairs on the feet, by regurgitating vomitus, and by passage through their alimentary tract (Rosef and Kapperud, 1983). The danger of flies as vectors of foodborne pathogens is compounded by the fact that they have been observed to defecate at 4- to 5-min intervals throughout the day (Rosef and Kapperud, 1983). Adult houseflies were able to transmit bacteria from food to their eggs, and some of the bacteria were also transmitted to first-generation adult flies (Pava-Ripoll et&#xA0;al., 2015).
      A study conducted in 2005&#xA0;at farms from northwestern Taiwan collected 114 Salmonella isolates from flies and swine stool samples. Of four serotypes that were present in both flies and swine stool samples, eight of 18 PFGE patterns described were present in both, indicating the potential of the flies to function as vectors (Wang et&#xA0;al., 2011).
      To examine bacterial populations in the Australian bush fly in three different environments, flies were captured at a cattle farm, an urban shopping center car park, and the site of a barbeque in Australia. The highest bacterial populations per fly were found in the farm environment and the lowest one in the urban environment. Multidrug resistance was detected in 94% of the Salmonella and 87% of the Shigella isolates, underscoring the potential of these flies to function as vectors for the foodborne dispersal of antimicrobial resistance (Vriesekoop and Shaw, 2010).
      A study conducted in 2006 in Dormagen, Germany, trapped 12 fly species at domestic animal-related places, including a dog pound, a poultry house, a cattle barn, a horse stable, and a pigpen. Musca domestica was the dominant species and represented 43% of all the flies caught. All individual flies that were captured carried multiple microbial species, including potentially pathogenic and nonpathogenic microorganisms, and their capacity to act as vectors was demonstrated by the successful transfer of the microorganisms from live flies to blood agar plates (Forster et&#xA0;al., 2007).
      To assess the ability of Musca domestica to transfer bacteria to clean surfaces, fluorescent E. coli were used to contaminate a sugar-milk aqueous solution, steak, and potato salad, and the number of bacteria transferred to the flies was quantitated. The bacteria were detected on 43%, 53%, and 62% of the flies from sugar/milk, steak, and potato salad, respectively, and contaminated flies were able to transfer the bacteria to the inner surface of a sterile jar (De Jesus et&#xA0;al., 2004).
      In European Union countries, the prevalence of Campylobacter in broiler chicken batches meant that elimination of this pathogen from the chicken flocks was identified as an immediate public health priority (see Chapter 8). Flies were implicated as a vector by several studies, and their contribution makes public health initiatives more challenging (Bahrndorff et&#xA0;al., 2013). The housefly Musca domestica is the fly species most often found to carry Campylobacter species (Bahrndorff et&#xA0;al., 2014, Hald et&#xA0;al., 2008). The seasonality of Campylobacter infections, which increase in incidence in May and June, was hypothesized to reflect the direct or indirect exposure of humans to contaminated material carried by fly species that have been in contact with human, bird, or animal feces or became contaminated by raw food. A study that plotted the time required for M. domestica larval development against ambient temperature from England and Wales for 1989 and 1999 found a strong relationship between the weekly number of human Campylobacter infections and M. domestica larval development times. The periods when human Campylobacter cases exceed a 7-day average of 170 cases per day occurred when the M. domestica larval development time was less than 3&#xA0;weeks (Nichols, 2005).
      A study that explored the benefits of fly screen interventions on Campylobacter prevalence among chicken flocks at broiler chicken houses from Jutland, Denmark, found that fly screens that prevented the entry of the flies into the chicken houses reduced the prevalence of Campylobacter-positive flocks from about 41% during the 2003&#x2013;2005 period (without fly screens) to about 10% during the 2006&#x2013;2009 period (with fly screens) (Bahrndorff et&#xA0;al., 2013). Even though the prevalence of Campylobacter infections and the number of flies generally peak during the summer, Campylobacter prevalence did not peak during the summer in the houses with fly screens (Bahrndorff et&#xA0;al., 2013, Nichols, 2005).

      3.6
      The Food-Processing Environment
      Pathogens in the food-processing environment may originate from several sources, including contaminated food, food preparation surfaces, or food handlers (Todd et&#xA0;al., 2009). At each of the locations where food is processed or prepared, multiple factors can shape contamination and transmission. For example, in the kitchen environment, microbial pathogens can be introduced from commercial food products, by cross-contamination of the food from kitchen utensils, or by insufficient cooking or inadequate storage (Hall et&#xA0;al., 2008, Vogt and Dippold, 2005).
      Food handlers represent an important reservoir of pathogens. A study that enrolled volunteers from a food company in Portugal found that about 20% had nasal colonization and about 11% had hand colonization with Staphylococcus aureus. Approximately 6% of the participants presented both nasal and hand colonization and, in some of them, PFGE analysis identified the same strain at both locations (Castro et&#xA0;al., 2016). Food workers may contaminate the food directly or by fomites (Sharps et&#xA0;al., 2012). An analysis of 191 norovirus and sapovirus outbreaks that occurred in Denmark between 2005 and 2011 revealed that 34% of the outbreaks were linked to contamination during food preparation or serving, and the food handlers were asymptomatic in 64% of them (Franck et&#xA0;al., 2015).
      Several categories of outbreaks where food workers are involved have been described. The most typical outbreak scenario is that of an infected food worker contaminating food or food contact surfaces (Todd et&#xA0;al., 2007). A Giardia lamblia (also known as Giardia duodenalis; see Chapter 15) outbreak in November 1990 affected employees at a Connecticut company and resulted in 18 laboratory-confirmed and nine suspected cases of giardiasis. A case&#x2013;control study implicated raw sliced vegetables that were served in the employee cafeteria and prepared by an infected food handler. While this employee always wore gloves when preparing sandwiches, she had been seen without gloves when preparing vegetables for a salad (Mintz et&#xA0;al., 1993). In September 1998, a Campylobacter outbreak was reported in Salina, Kansas, among people who attended a luncheon at an elementary school and in several community members. Consumption of gravy or pineapple was associated with illness, and both food products were prepared in a kitchen that served six other schools, none of which experienced outbreaks. The outbreak was traced to a cafeteria worker who had diarrhea, and isolates with identical PFGE pattern were obtained from the worker and from eight lunch attendees. Four community members became ill during the same time, but the strains that they were infected with presented different PFGE patterns. This was the first time when PFGE analysis was used during the epidemiological analysis of a Campylobacter outbreak in the United States, and it revealed that the school cases were the result of an outbreak, while the community members were infected in unrelated, sporadic infections (Olsen et&#xA0;al., 2001) (see Chapter 8 for more on Campylobacter epidemiology).
      In some outbreaks, food workers employed at more than one location may contaminate food at each of those locations. On February 24, 2012, the Long Beach Department of Health and Human Services reported the first three cases of an S. typhimurium outbreak. The first three culture-confirmed cases were diagnosed in two siblings aged 3 and 1, whose symptoms started on January 20 and January 24, respectively, and in an 83-year-old man whose illness started on February 2. The three strains were indistinguishable by PFGE (see Chapter 2). An investigation revealed that 19 cases, 15 confirmed and four probable, occurred during a 4-month period, and all isolates had the same electrophoretic pattern. The initial epidemiological investigation focused on several restaurants and grocery stores from the same neighborhood, where several of the affected individuals dined and shopped, but no significant findings were made. When on February 27 a neighboring jurisdiction reported a case, with a PFGE pattern matching the outbreak strain, and the person reported that within the previous 24&#xA0;h she ate at the restaurant where several other cases ate, in the same neighborhood that other cases reported frequenting, an onsite visit was made to this restaurant. The restaurant owner also owned a second restaurant, which was named by two of the affected individuals. During the environmental health inspections, the owner mentioned that two of the cooks were working at both restaurants. One of these two employees tested positive for Salmonella, and the PFGE pattern of the strain matched the outbreak strain (Holman et&#xA0;al., 2014). The food items sampled at both restaurants tested negative, and an epidemiological investigation revealed that the source of the outbreak was this infected food handler, who was working at both restaurants. This example illustrates the complexity of epidemiological investigations and the need to pursue multiple venues when investigating the source of an outbreak (Holman et&#xA0;al., 2014).
      Food workers who contaminate food products may be asymptomatic. A large typhoid fever outbreak occurred in the United States in 1989 among convention attendees and staff at a hotel from Sullivan County, New York. The outbreak involved 43 culture-confirmed and 24 probable infections among guests, one culture-confirmed and one asymptomatic culture-confirmed case among employees, and one culture-confirmed case in the child of a hotel guest, who did not stay at the hotel and was considered to have been infected by secondary transmission. The affected patients were more likely to have consumed orange juice for one of the breakfasts, compared with control individuals. Salmonella typhi was isolated from the stool of an asymptomatic worker who had handled the orange juice. A survival study of the outbreak strain revealed that, at room temperature, half of the bacteria survived for 6&#xA0;h in reconstituted orange juice (Birkhead et&#xA0;al., 1993).
      Another outbreak scenario is when a food worker contaminates other workers, who infect consumers in the same or in a different establishment (Todd et&#xA0;al., 2007). An example of such an outbreak was documented in August 2000, when an increase in Salmonella Thompson infection was noted in southern California. Most affected individuals ate at a restaurant chain before becoming ill, and a case&#x2013;control study implicated the consumption of burgers. The earliest onset of illness was in a burger bun packer at a bakery, who had not eaten at the restaurants from the chain but had worked while ill. The bakery supplied burger buns to some of the restaurants. This bakery employee was responsible for removing freshly baked bread and buns from the cooling rack, feeding them through an automatic slicer, and packaging the bread for distribution. She did not wear gloves and she handled every individual bread item. She became ill on July 13 but continued working, and after being hospitalized overnight on July 17 she continued working from July 18, when she was released, until July 23. Her brother became ill on July 17, and his primary duty was mixing the dough. He was removed from work by the Health Department on August 3. It was thought that the employee became ill either from his sister or from consuming contaminated buns (Kimura et&#xA0;al., 2005).
      In certain outbreaks, it may not be clear whether food workers were the source or the victims of the outbreak (Greig et&#xA0;al., 2007). In 1996, after a buffet style party on a ward from a Welsh hospital, 80 of the 460 patients and staff became ill with a gastrointestinal infection. Foods associated with the outbreak included ham, coleslaw, bread rolls, cheese, and pineapple on sticks. Participants ate food from the hospital kitchen and food brought in and prepared on the ward by staff and patients. The investigation suggested that food was contaminated either during preparation by staff and patients or during the party when people served themselves (Fone et&#xA0;al., 1999).
      Another category of foodborne outbreaks is when food contaminated at one or several sites is delivered to one or multiple locations that experience the outbreaks (Todd et&#xA0;al., 2007). A foodborne cyclosporidiasis outbreak that occurred in 1996 in North America was traced to raspberries imported from Guatemala (Manuel et&#xA0;al., 1999, Manuel et&#xA0;al., 2000). In the United States, 1465 cases from 20 states, the District of Columbia, and two provinces were reported during this outbreak (Herwaldt and Ackers, 1997). In the index Canadian cluster of the outbreak, eating strawberry flan, decorated with raspberries and blueberries, was associated with an increased relative risk of acquiring the infection (Manuel et&#xA0;al., 1999). In another example, epidemiological investigations and genotyping linked one source of imported frozen raspberries to eight independent norovirus outbreaks in Denmark between October 2010 and September 2011. Collectively, these outbreaks caused 242 cases, 32 of which were laboratory confirmed. The outbreaks occurred at different locations, including a company canteen in Viborg and Herlev, a hospital canteen in K&#xF8;ge, a conference center in Aarhus, and a caf&#xE9; in Copenhagen. The vehicles in these outbreaks were raspberry cake (in Viborg), raspberry smoothie (in Aarhus and Copenhagen), raspberry mousse (in Herlev), and red cabbage salad with raw raspberries (in K&#xF8;ge). Virus isolated from one patient sample had an identical RNA sequence to the virus isolated from berries. In one of these outbreaks, the raspberries originated from a bag of mixed frozen berries that had been packaged in Belgium and raw materials from Serbia, and subsequently it was determined that they came from the same batch of contaminated raspberries that was responsible for all the other outbreaks (Muller et&#xA0;al., 2015).
      Finally, customers, as opposed to workers, may sometimes be the source of foodborne outbreaks (Todd et&#xA0;al., 2007). This is illustrated by three successive gastroenteritis outbreaks with Norwalk-like viruses that occurred between May 1998 and June 1999 in a Mediterranean-style restaurant in Melbourne, Australia. In the restaurant, food was typically served on platters and eaten with fingers, from a common platter, and guests typically would move from table to table. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that each outbreak was caused by a different norovirus strain, indicating that the virus had been introduced on multiple occasions, rather than having circulated continuously. Due to the fact that the incubation period of norovirus gastroenteritis is about 24&#x2013;48&#xA0;h, short incubation periods in this study were interpreted as suggesting infection before visiting the restaurant. In the first outbreak, a guest whose fecal specimens tested positive for the norovirus had a 4-h incubation period and was thought to have been the index case. In the second outbreak, one of the guests had a 2-h incubation period, but a fecal sample was not obtained from him. In the third outbreak, a food handler was positive for the virus and could have been the source of the outbreak. The virus appears to have been introduced by guests or staff, as opposed to a long-term food reservoir (Marshall et&#xA0;al., 2001).
      Some outbreaks are linked to inadequate temperatures in the environment where food is processed or served. A foodborne outbreak in Sulyyel, about 400&#xA0;km from Riyadh, was reported among participants at a wedding ceremony. Nine food items and drinks had been served at the ceremony and, of these, meat, rice, and restaurant-made sweets were significantly associated with illness. Non&#x2013;typhoid group C Salmonella were isolated from 62 stool samples collected from individuals who became ill. Bacteria were present in stool samples from all the restaurant workers, and a health inspection revealed the lack of air conditioning and high ambient temperatures (Aljoudi et&#xA0;al., 2010). On September 8, 2006, an outbreak of botulism (see Chapter 19) caused by carrot juice was reported in the United States. It involved three Georgia patients who consumed carrot juice from the same bottle before becoming ill. This was followed by the recognition of botulism in a woman from Florida, on September 25, who had been hospitalized since September 16, and a few weeks later, on October 2, botulism was reported in two people from Ontario, Canada, who had been hospitalized weeks earlier in separate hospitals, and they all consumed carrot juice (Sheth et&#xA0;al., 2008). Type A toxin was recovered from carrot juice produced by one manufacturer, and inadequate refrigeration was implicated. This outbreak was characterized by a rapid clinical onset, and two of the patients required mechanical ventilation for over 1 year (Sheth et&#xA0;al., 2008). One of the bottles that was analyzed contained very high concentrations of toxin, and this was thought to explain the rapid progression and the protracted course, despite prompt antitoxin administration (Sheth et&#xA0;al., 2008).
      Some foodborne outbreaks are caused by the ingestion of raw food products that are contaminated. For example, several cases of human brucellosis were reported on Jeju Island in South Korea, at a restaurant where, between 2012 and 2013, customers ingested raw parts of fetal calf as a folk remedy (Yoo et&#xA0;al., 2015).

      3.7
      Cross-Contamination and Environmental Surfaces
      A study that enrolled volunteers from the Netherlands revealed that even though most consumers were knowledgeable about the importance of heating food and preventing cross-contamination, they did not always apply this knowledge in practice. Some of the participants made errors known to cause cross-contamination in the kitchen environment, such as allowing raw meat juices to come into contact with a cooked meal, and one in five participants placed unprocessed food on the same cutting surface as raw meat (Fischer et&#xA0;al., 2007).
      To explore consumer awareness about food safety, an Internet survey of a nationally representative group of 1504 adult grocery shoppers from the United States examined their practices when handling raw poultry at home (Kosa et&#xA0;al., 2015). Almost 70% of the consumers reported washing or rinsing raw poultry before cooking it, an unsafe practice that may lead to the splashing of contaminated water and the transfer of pathogens to other foods and kitchen surfaces. Only 17.5% of the consumers reported storing raw poultry in the refrigerator correctly, and of the 62% of consumers who reported owning a food thermometer, only 26% or fewer reported using it to check the internal temperature of small cuts of poultry or ground poultry. Moreover, only 11% of the consumers who thawed raw poultry in cold water reported doing it correctly (Kosa et&#xA0;al., 2015).
      Cross-contamination in the kitchen environment represents an important contributor to outbreaks, particularly through the transfer of pathogens to and from cutting boards, kitchen surfaces, sponges, and cloths. To quantitate cross-contamination between fresh-cut produce and common kitchen surfaces, a study used cocktails of rifampin-resistant Salmonella and rifampin-resistant E. coli O157:H7 for various transfer scenarios. Bacterial transfer was dependent on produce type, surface moisture, and drying time but less dependent on the type of the kitchen surface. More bacteria were transferred from kitchen surfaces to produce than from produce to kitchen surfaces (Jensen et&#xA0;al., 2013). A study that measured Campylobacter transfer from poultry legs purchased in supermarkets to cutting boards found that transfer rates reached 81% when the product had been in contact with the cutting board for 10&#xA0;min and was significantly lower when contact occurred for 1&#xA0;min (Fravalo et&#xA0;al., 2009). In another study, both C. jejuni and C. coli were transferred from naturally contaminated raw poultry to cooked chicken via the cutting board, and transfer was detected even when the samples had low contamination levels (Guyard-Nicodeme et&#xA0;al., 2013).
      A study conducted in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, collected 24 sponges from industrial kitchens, counted microorganisms on half of them, and used the other half to study the transfer of bacteria to stainless steel and polyethylene. All sponges were contaminated by heterotrophic microorganisms and about 83% were contaminated with fecal coliforms. Large numbers of microorganisms could be transferred from sponges to both surfaces. Survival of the transferred microorganisms at room temperature decreased over time, and even though the reduction was greatest in the first 4&#xA0;h, viable organisms were still found after 24&#xA0;h (Rossi et&#xA0;al., 2013).

Salmonella enteritidis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Campylobacter jejuni were shown to remain viable on dry stainless steel at room temperature and pose cross-contamination risks for a considerable time, depending on the specific pathogen and on the level of contamination (Kusumaningrum et&#xA0;al., 2003). Staphylococcus aureus was recovered from the surfaces for at least 4 days for both high (105
&#xA0;CFU/cm2) and moderate (103
&#xA0;CFU/cm2) contamination levels, but the number of viable bacteria decreased below the detection limit within 2&#xA0;days&#xA0;at low contamination levels (10&#xA0;CFU/cm2). Salmonella enteritidis was recovered from surfaces for at least 4&#xA0;days&#xA0;at high contamination levels, and the numbers decreased to the detection limit within 24&#xA0;h at moderate levels and within 1&#xA0;h&#xA0;at low levels. Campylobacter jejuni was most susceptible to slow air-drying on surfaces, and at high contamination levels their numbers decreased below the detection limit within 4&#xA0;h. The microorganisms were artificially transmitted from wet sponges to stainless steel surfaces and from these surfaces to food, with transfer rates of 25&#x2013;100% (Kusumaningrum et&#xA0;al., 2003).
      During the preparation of contaminated chickens in domestic kitchens, significant bacterial dissemination may occur onto hands, cloths, and food contact surfaces such as chopping boards (Cogan et&#xA0;al., 1999, Cogan et&#xA0;al., 2002). A study found that in the case of Salmonella, even low contamination levels can grow after cross-contamination, and removal of bacteria from cloths by washing was more difficult after they had been stored overnight (Cogan et&#xA0;al., 2002).
      A study that used bologna slices that had been inoculated with different levels of L. monocytogenes revealed that transfer to stainless steel and to polyethylene processing surfaces increased with the inoculation level. Transfer efficiency was not statistically different to wet compared with dry processing surfaces, and greater numbers of bacteria were transferred from bologna to stainless steel than to polyethylene. Transfer was not affected by the roughness or by the finish of the stainless steel surfaces (Rodriguez et&#xA0;al., 2007).

      Cross-contamination of food and/or environmental surfaces has been implicated in many outbreaks. In June 2005, an investigation was conducted to examine the source of gastrointestinal illness in individuals who attended luncheons catered by an Adelaide caf&#xE9; and in people who ate at the caf&#xE9;. To identify the source of the outbreak, 61 respondents who met the case definition of two or more gastrointestinal symptoms after attending a luncheon catered by the caf&#xE9; were included in a study, and S. typhimurium phage type 64 was confirmed in 32 of them. Of the 61 individuals, 59 (96%) reported having eaten a bread roll. The same strain was detected in raw defrosted chicken recovered from the caf&#xE9;&#x2019;s kitchen, suggesting cross-contamination between the chicken and one or several ingredients used to prepare the bread rolls (Moffatt et&#xA0;al., 2006).
      In May 2005, a gastroenteritis outbreak caused by S. enteritidis phage type 21 was associated with attending an annual traditional fair in a small Austrian village. Exposure in all 85 affected individuals occurred at one point in time, and 20 of the 52 stool specimens that were examined, from patients and two kitchen staff, were positive for S. enteritidis phage type 21. Mixed salad, which included potatoes, emerged as the only food exposure that had an independent effect on disease risk, and the causative pathogen was cultured from the stock of eggs used at the fair and from all three drag swabs and one barn dust sample collected from the responsible egg-laying flock. PFGE revealed that the bacterial isolates from eggs, the flock, and humans were indistinguishable. It was hypothesized that the boiled potatoes were contaminated in the kitchen area from raw eggs that were used to prepare an egg dressing (Schmid et&#xA0;al., 2006).
      Another outbreak in which cross-contamination was suspected occurred in 1993&#xA0;at a nursing home in Brooklyn, New York, in a mixed outbreak with Salmonella Heidelberg and C. jejuni (Layton et&#xA0;al., 1997). From the 93 patients who became ill and submitted specimens, stool cultures were positive for S. Heidelberg in 24 (26%), C. jejuni in 14 (15%), and both microorganisms in 25 (27%) (Layton et&#xA0;al., 1997). A case&#x2013;control study revealed that of six different dietary plans that were available, only the pureed diet was strongly associated with positive stool tests. From the 52 pureed food items that were prepared during the week preceding the outbreak, five meat or poultry items were most strongly associated with stool positivity. Stool samples from food handlers and environmental swabs from the kitchen facility were negative for the pathogens. During this outbreak, two nurses also developed gastrointestinal illness, and stool cultures were positive for S. Heidelberg in one of them and for C. jejuni in the other one. However, during the epidemiological investigation, a food handling error that had occurred several days earlier was unveiled. During the preparation of chopped liver salad, the chopped chicken liver had been placed into a bowl that still contained the juices from the raw chicken liver. The salad was blast-chilled and refrigerated until lunch the following day, but due to a coolant failure in the refrigerator, the temperature of the salad increased to 50&#xB0;F. The chopped liver salad was the only common food that the two nurses ate in the hospital, and only residents on the pureed diet were offered chopped liver salad for lunch. It is interesting that during the investigation of this outbreak, the case&#x2013;control study did not identify the chopped liver salad as the source of contamination, but other findings pointed to this dish. Based on the epidemic curve, contamination of a single food item with multiple bacterial pathogens was suspected, probably due to several batches of raw chicken liver contaminated with multiple pathogens. This outbreak underscored the complexity of investigating mixed outbreaks (Layton et&#xA0;al., 1997).
      Foodborne illness caused by multiple microorganisms is relatively rare. Another such outbreak occurred in 1968 in Jersey City, New Jersey, and was linked to a Thanksgiving dinner in the members of four related families (Janeway et&#xA0;al., 1971). The meal implicated in this outbreak was served to 18 people, and 17 of them became ill. Two of the victims, a 17-year-old boy and his 56-year-old mother died, and they were both had previously been in good health. The person who did not become ill ate very little and left because of an argument. Salmonella enteritidis was isolated from all those who attended the dinner and from several food items, including turkey stuffing, turkey slices mixed with stuffing and gravy, peas, apple pie, pumpkin pie, and cranberry sauce. It was also isolated from environmental locations in the home and from an 8-year-old female beagle, which was not in the house where the meal was prepared and served, and did not eat any of the dinner food items but was thought to have licked the vomitus of one of the individuals. Additionally, C. perfringens was found in the turkey meat and stuffing, and Enterocccus faecalis was identified in the stuffing and in the turkey carcass (Janeway et&#xA0;al., 1971). Illness started between 3 and 18&#xA0;h after eating the meal, with a median incubation of 7&#xA0;h. While S. enteritidis was initially suspected to have caused the outbreak, the severity of the clinical manifestations was striking, considering that this pathogen mostly causes mild illness, with fatalities observed only in the very young and in those with underlying pathologies. The short incubation period and the severity of the clinical manifestations were explained by the additional involvement of one or both of the other two pathogens (Janeway et&#xA0;al., 1971).
      The complexity of transmission routes, the need for multiagency support, and the extensive epidemiological investigations that are sometimes required are illustrated by two listeriosis outbreaks from British Columbia, Canada, caused by soft ripened cheese contaminated from environmental sources (McIntyre et&#xA0;al., 2015). The two outbreaks occurred in February 2002 (49 illnesses) and in September 2002 (86 illnesses). Pasteurized milk and the pasteurization process were ruled out in both outbreaks, and postpasteurization contamination was implicated. In the first outbreak, L. monocytogenes was detected in 64% of the cheese samples tested and in about 19% of the environmental samples tested, including food contact surfaces where cheese was aged and nonfood contact surfaces such as drains, air vents, the area around the plant, and the adjacent farm. Environmental transmission of the pathogen is thought to have likely occurred from farm animals to personnel and from them to culture solutions used during cheese production. In the second outbreak, L. monocytogenes was detected in 76% of the cheese samples tested and in about 19% of the environmental samples collected, including an ingredient sample, water inside and outside the plant, and farm samples. Isolates that were recovered from a cistern pipe, a water-soaked rag in the milking house, and a swallow&#x2019;s nest matched the PFGE profile of the outbreak strain (McIntyre et&#xA0;al., 2015). Birds were identified in the second outbreak as likely having contaminated the dairy plant&#x2019;s water supply and the cheese during the curd-washing step (McIntyre et&#xA0;al., 2015).

      3.8
      Airborne Route and Fomites
      A range of enteric viruses can cause gastrointestinal illness (see Chapter 14). One vomiting incident can distribute up to 30 million viral particles into the environment and this, in part, explains the high potential to transmit these viruses via the airborne route and fomites (Caul, 1994, Tung-Thompson et&#xA0;al., 2015).
      Rotavirus is the most important gastrointestinal pathogen in daycare settings (Dennehy, 2000). In addition to the fecal-oral route, rotaviruses are transmitted by nonenteral routes, which include fomites and the respiratory route (Dennehy, 2000, Prince et&#xA0;al., 1986). The stability of viruses in aerosols is relevant for their transmission. A study that examined the stability of aerosolized rotavirus reported that at 20&#xB0;C, the half-life of an aerosolized human rotavirus strain was about 44&#xA0;h at a relative humidity of 50% but decreased to about 24&#xA0;h at a relative humidity of 30% and to about 3.8&#xA0;h at a relative humidity of 80%. When fecally suspended virus was aerosolized, almost 80% of the airborne virus particles remained infectious after 24&#xA0;h at 20&#xB0;C and a relative humidity of 50% (Ijaz et&#xA0;al., 1985). In another study on aerosolized rotavirus, a relative humidity of 50% was optimal for survival, with 45% of the virus remaining viable after 72&#xA0;h and 3% after 9&#xA0;days. At 25% relative humidity, &#x223C;21% of the virus was viable after 72&#xA0;h, while at 80% relative humidity, 50% of the virus was not detectable after 2&#xA0;h (Sattar et&#xA0;al., 1984). Rotavirus RNA has been detected in air samples taken from the hospital rooms of rotavirus-infected children, suggesting that airborne spread may play a role in hospital and daycare settings (Dennehy et&#xA0;al., 1998). Aerosolization is also an important transmission route for noroviruses, which represent an underestimated cause of viral gastroenteritis (see Chapter 14). Airborne Norwalk-like gastroenteritis outbreaks have been reported in which airborne spread of the virus was the most likely possibility (Marks et&#xA0;al., 2000, Marks et&#xA0;al., 2003).
      Aerosol transmission may also be another important way by which pathogens enter the food chain. A study that examined bacteria in the air at three beef processing facilities in the United States detected E. coli O157:H7 in about 16% and S. enterica in 16.5% of the 291 air samples collected from the slaughter area. Aerobic bacteria and Enterobacteriaceae were most prevalent in samples collected near hide removal areas, suggesting that hide removal likely introduces pathogens into the air by the dispersion of liquid droplets, and could be a source of hide-to-carcass contamination (Schmidt et&#xA0;al., 2012). Similarly, a nationwide survey conducted in Japan to assess Salmonella prevalence in airborne dust from layer farms surveyed 203 farms between December 2004 and March 2005 and found that 48 (23.6%) of them were positive for Salmonella (Iwabuchi et&#xA0;al., 2010). Experimental studies also supported the possibility of nose-to-nose transmission of S. typhimurium among pigs (Oliveira et&#xA0;al., 2006, Oliveira et&#xA0;al., 2007) and turkeys (Harbaugh et&#xA0;al., 2006).
      Relevant for both food establishments and homes, toilet bowls represent another potential source for environmental contamination by aerosols. To mimic an episode of acute diarrhea, a study contaminated the sidewalls and bowl water from a domestic toilet with Serratia marcescens or with a bacteriophage. The highest level of airborne microorganisms was achieved immediately after the first flush, when almost twice as many bacteriophage particles were detected than bacteria. Sequential flushing caused their further distribution into the air, but the numbers declined after each flush (Barker and Jones, 2005).
      Apart from transmission via fomites in food-processing facilities, an unusual potential transmission route of foodborne pathogens by fomites is via currency. A five-strain mixture of Escherichia coli O157:H7 or S. enteritidis applied to the surfaces of sterile U.S. coins revealed that E. coli survived for up to 11&#xA0;days and Salmonella for up to 9&#xA0;days (Jiang and Doyle, 1999). In an analysis of banknotes from 10 different countries, the number of bacteria correlated with the type of banknote material. Moreover, the bacterial content on banknotes increased with the decreasing values of the &#x201C;index of economic freedom,&#x201D; which expresses the social and/or economic status of a country. Pathogens could be isolated only after enrichment, and while their levels did not appear to be alarming, precautionary measures should be considered for the concurrent handling of food and money (Vriesekoop et&#xA0;al., 2010).

      3.9
      Foodborne Pathogens With Multiple Transmission Vehicles/Routes
      Some of the foodborne illnesses may be transmitted by more than one route, complicating epidemiological investigations and making preventive interventions more challenging.

        3.9.1
        Botulism
        Foodborne botulism, caused by preformed heat-labile botulism neurotoxin, is a severe and progressive neuroparalytic disease that may progress to respiratory complications and death as a result of progressive neuromuscular blockade (Brook, 2007, Lawrence et&#xA0;al., 2007, Peck et&#xA0;al., 2011, Proverbio et&#xA0;al., 2015, Sobel, 2005). Botulinum toxin is one of the most powerful toxins known, with commonly cited lethal dose estimates for purified botulinum toxin type A being 70&#xA0;&#x3BC;g orally and 0.8&#x2013;0.9&#xA0;&#x3BC;g inhalationally for a 70-kg man, but lower doses have been reported in other studies, and as little as 30&#x2013;100&#xA0;ng could be potentially fatal via the oral route (Peck et&#xA0;al., 2011, Sobel, 2005). Most cases are sporadic or occur as small outbreaks, but larger outbreaks caused by commercial food have also been reported (Sobel, 2005, Sobel et&#xA0;al., 2004) (see Chapter 19 for more on botulinum toxin).
        Foodborne botulism is one the four naturally occurring forms of botulism that have been described, the other ones being infant botulism, adult intestinal colonization botulism, and wound botulism (Lawrence et&#xA0;al., 2007, Sobel, 2005) (see Chapter 19). Infant botulism is the most frequent form encountered (Lawrence et&#xA0;al., 2007) and is a life-threatening condition that usually occurs in infants younger than 12&#xA0;months (Goonetilleke and Harris, 2004, Fenicia and Anniballi, 2009). Honey and environmental exposure are the main routes of acquiring the microorganisms (Brook, 2007, Tanzi and Gabay, 2002). Adult intestinal colonization botulism is similar to infant botulism and mostly occurs in adults with changes in the intestinal flora, including previous surgery, Crohn disease, achlorhydria, or recent antibiotic treatment (Cherington, 1998, Chia et&#xA0;al., 1986, Lawrence et&#xA0;al., 2007). Wound botulism, caused by wound contamination with Clostridium botulinum spores, is usually associated with trauma or intravenous drug use (Burningham et&#xA0;al., 1994, Lawrence et&#xA0;al., 2007) (see Chapter 19).
        For foodborne botulism, home-canned food is the most common source of contamination (see Chapter 19). In April 2015, a large outbreak of botulism, associated with a church potluck meal in Ohio, was linked to eating salad with improperly home-canned potatoes, and in a 1983 outbreak from Illinois, saut&#xE9;ed onions in sandwiches from a restaurant were implicated as the vehicle (McCarty et&#xA0;al., 2015).
        In recent years, a novel form of botulism has been attributed to pruno, an alcoholic beverage made by inmates (Walters et&#xA0;al., 2015). Pruno is prepared by fermentation from water, fruit, sugar, and miscellaneous ingredients (Walters et&#xA0;al., 2015). It was first recognized as a vehicle for botulism in 2004 and 2005, in two outbreaks from California (Vugia et&#xA0;al., 2009). The first outbreak, at the California state prison in Riverside County, affected four men who drank from the same batch of pruno and developed clinical manifestations 3 days later. Two of the men required intubation and all four survived. The second outbreak, at a California state prison in Monterey County, affected a man who required intubation and survived (Vugia et&#xA0;al., 2009). In early October 2011, foodborne botulism was diagnosed in eight maximum security prison inmates from the Utah State Prison in Draper, Utah (Prevention, 2012). Several batches of pruno were circulating among the inmates, and one of them had been prepared from oranges, grapefruit, canned fruit, water, powdered drink mix, and a baked potato. The baked potato was the only one of these ingredients that had not been used in other pruno batches, and an investigation revealed that the toxin was most likely produced when the potato was added to a mixture of the other ingredients under low-acidity, anaerobic conditions during fermentation (Prevention, 2012). Another outbreak occurred in late November 2012 in Arizona, when eight inmates from a maximum security prison developed botulism after drinking pruno from a single batch (Prevention, 2013).

        3.9.2
        Listeria
        An example of a microorganism with multiple transmission routes is L. monocytogenes, a human pathogen that is naturally present in the soil (Moshtaghi et&#xA0;al., 2003, Vivant et&#xA0;al., 2013). L. monocytogenes has become a serious concern due to its ability to survive pH extremes, high salt concentrations, low water activity, and refrigeration temperatures and to multiply in diverse habitats (see Chapter 12).
        The fecal-oral route is the main route of L. monocytogenes transmission (Butler et&#xA0;al., 2015, Vally et&#xA0;al., 2014). A study reported that 69% of transmission occurs by food, 7% by the environment, 5% by animals, and 5% by the person-to-person route, and 13% was linked to travel (Havelaar et&#xA0;al., 2008). In addition to food, Listeria can be transmitted by water (Linke et&#xA0;al., 2014). A variety of food vehicles have been involved in outbreaks including coleslaw, raw and cooked meat, seafood, dairy products, sandwiches, and other ready-to-eat foods (see Chapter 12). As well as raw materials, environmental sources, including factory equipment such as a commercial meat slicer, have been shown to result in product contamination and foodborne outbreaks (Vorst et&#xA0;al., 2006, Sheen, 2008, Keskinen et&#xA0;al., 2008, Garrido et&#xA0;al., 2009).
        Soil is an environmental niche for L. monocytogenes, and the agricultural recycling of organic wastes without adequate sanitation is another transmission mechanism (Garrec et&#xA0;al., 2003, Vivant et&#xA0;al., 2013). From soil, the bacteria can also be transferred to vegetables that enter the food chain, including internalization in salad leaves through the vascular root system after irrigation with contaminated water (Chitarra et&#xA0;al., 2014) (see Chapter 12).
        Fecal shedding of L. monocytogenes by dairy cattle, which are reservoirs for the pathogen, is also a strong risk factor for the contamination of milk, dairy products, and meat (Haley et&#xA0;al., 2015, Ivanek et&#xA0;al., 2006). A longitudinal study that collected fecal samples from dairy cows for 33&#xA0;days and examined the daily variability of fecal shedding revealed that 94% of the cows excreted L. monocytogenes in feces at least once during the study period, and the prevalence of fecal shedding varied, over time, from 0% to 100%, underscoring the limitations associated with collecting cross-sectional data in a single herd. The prevalence of L. monocytogenes in bulk tank milk was reported to vary between 1% and more than 12% in various studies, underscoring the dangers of consuming raw milk and raw milk products (Oliver et&#xA0;al., 2005, Van Kessel et&#xA0;al., 2011). A study that collected environmental samples, milk and milk product samples, and half-udder ovine and caprine foremilk samples from 53 dairy farms in the dairy intensive area of lower Austria detected L. monocytogenes in &#x223C;1% of the samples, and contamination was found on about 30% of the inspected farms (Schoder et&#xA0;al., 2011). Samples from working boots and fecal matter had a significantly higher overall prevalence than samples from the milk processing environment, and bacterial isolation was 3&#x2013;7 times more likely on farms where silage was fed to animals throughout the year compared with farms where silage was not fed to the animals (Schoder et&#xA0;al., 2011).

        An important consideration is that L. monocytogenes has been detected in bioaerosols from high-throughput chicken-slaughtering facilities, particularly in the receiving-killing, defeathering, and evisceration areas, underscoring its potential to spread to other areas, and the bacteria survived in the aerosols for several hours (Lues et&#xA0;al., 2007, Spurlock and Zottola, 1991).

        3.9.3
        Noroviruses
        Norovirus is one of the most infectious viruses known, and the average probability of a viral particle causing a human infection was estimated to be close to 50% (Teunis et&#xA0;al., 2008). Noroviruses are the most frequent causes of acute viral gastroenteritis and foodborne disease in most of the world (Moore et&#xA0;al., 2015). They are often spread by food, and among simple foods, transmission occurs mostly by fresh vegetables (30&#x2013;40%), fruits and nuts (10&#x2013;20%), mollusks (10&#x2013;15%), and dairy (5&#x2013;15%) (see Chapter 14). In addition to their foodborne transmission, noroviruses can also be transmitted by the person-to-person route (Moore et&#xA0;al., 2015). A study that analyzed 2895 norovirus outbreaks with a known transmission route that occurred in the United States between 2009 and 2013 reported that person-to-person transmission could be documented in 2425 (83.7%) and foodborne transmissions in 465 (16.1%) of these outbreaks (Vega et&#xA0;al., 2014). In another analysis, of 552 outbreaks documented in 20 states from the United States between 2009 and 2010, foodborne transmission occurred in 78 (14%) and person-to-person transmission in 340 (62%) cases, whereas the transmission route was not reported for the 134 remaining outbreaks (Vega et&#xA0;al., 2011).
        About half of norovirus outbreaks have been linked to food handlers (Widdowson et&#xA0;al., 2005). A study examined the transfer of two norovirus strains, originating from clinical stool samples, from gloved fingertips to soft berries and lettuce, and vice versa. Virus transfer was greater from gloves to lettuce than to soft berries, and this was explained by differences in the applied pressure. Transfer from produce to glove was generally larger than transfer from glove to produce, underscoring the possibility to cross-contaminate food products via food handlers (Verhaelen et&#xA0;al., 2013). (see Chapter 14).
        Noroviruses can also be transmitted through person-to-person contact. This is exemplified by an acute gastroenteritis outbreak during a 2011 summer camp from Spain, in which a child is thought to have transmitted the virus to other children during a bus ride from Barcelona to the campsite, and cases later also appeared in families that were not in the camp, presumably via person-to-person transmission (Solano et&#xA0;al., 2014).
        Moderate evidence, including epidemiological studies, supports the transmission of noroviruses by aerosols and contamination of surfaces (Marks et&#xA0;al., 2000, Jones and Brosseau, 2015) (see Chapter 14). Transmission has also been documented on airplanes, including among staff members working in successive shifts (Kirking et&#xA0;al., 2010, Thornley et&#xA0;al., 2011).

      3.10
      Superspreading
      Historically, models used to describe the dynamics of infectious diseases have assumed that infected individuals are homogeneous with respect to transmission of the pathogen at the population level. In other words, it was thought that an infected individual has more or less equal chances of infecting susceptible contacts and that each susceptible contact is more or less equally likely to become infected (Bolzoni et&#xA0;al., 2007). However, the number of infectious diseases for which heterogeneity in transmission has been documented is growing (Chao et&#xA0;al., 2013, Garske and Rhodes, 2008, Liebman et&#xA0;al., 2014). One of the key observations on the dynamics of infectious disease outbreaks at the population level is superspreading, a phenomenon that has been described for many pathogens and in many host species, including humans, animals, birds, and plants (Capparelli et&#xA0;al., 2009, Cronin et&#xA0;al., 2010, Paull et&#xA0;al., 2012, Reisen et&#xA0;al., 2009, Stein, 2011). Early in the 20th century, Mary Mallon, more widely known as Typhoid Mary, infected at least 54 people with S. typhi and became the first and perhaps the best documented superspreader (Gonzalez-Escobedo et&#xA0;al., 2011, Marineli et&#xA0;al., 2013, Paull et&#xA0;al., 2012).
      Two nonexclusive mechanisms of superspreading have been described. Some individuals, known as superspreaders, create many more secondary contacts that most others in a population. Others, known as supershedders, shed larger amounts of pathogen than most others. By this definition, superspreaders reflect more the host&#x2013;host interaction, while supershedders reflect more the host&#x2013;microbe interaction (Chase-Topping et&#xA0;al., 2008).
      Superspreading has been described at the level of individuals, groups of individuals, and species. For example, during the 2002&#x2013;2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak, more than 71% of the cases in Hong Kong and more than 74% of the ones in Singapore were attributed to superspreading events (Li et&#xA0;al., 2004). A study that examined more than 15,000 Scottish sheep farms between 2003 and 2007 found that due to heterogeneities in the animal movement patterns, less than 20% of the farms contributed to more than 80% of the transmission potential (Volkova et&#xA0;al., 2010). Further, a single relatively uncommon avian species, the American robin (Turdus migratorius), appeared to be responsible for most West Nile virus&#x2013;infectious mosquitoes (Kilpatrick et&#xA0;al., 2006).
      Superspreading is important both in human and in animal species. A longitudinal study that examined Brucella abortus shedding in the milk of 500 water buffaloes from four herds in southern Italy, a region endemic for brucellosis, revealed that 80% of the animal tested were nonshedders, and from those that shed the bacteria, 81% were shedding at low levels (&#x2264;103
&#xA0;colony-forming units [CFU]/mL), and almost 16% were shedding large numbers of bacteria (&#x2265;104
&#xA0;CFU/mL) and acted as supershedders (Borriello et&#xA0;al., 2013, Capparelli et&#xA0;al., 2009). Culling the supershedding animals significantly reduced the percentage of animals that became positive during a 3-month follow-up period, illustrating that this approach could effectively reduce pathogen transmission in a population by identifying and selectively culling highly shedding animals (Capparelli et&#xA0;al., 2009).

      Cattle are the primary reservoir for E. coli O157:H7, a bacterium that is distributed worldwide and is most often transmitted by contaminated water or food (Ahmed and Shimamoto, 2015, Bell et&#xA0;al., 1994, Jensen et&#xA0;al., 2015, King et&#xA0;al., 2014, Marder et&#xA0;al., 2014, Riley, 2014, Soon et&#xA0;al., 2011, Wendel et&#xA0;al., 2009). Infection with E. coli O157:H7 may be asymptomatic (Griffin et&#xA0;al., 1988, Rahal et&#xA0;al., 2012, Su and Brandt, 1995) and it may cause mild disease or nonbloody diarrhea (Lim et&#xA0;al., 2010, Rodrigue et&#xA0;al., 1995), but the pathogen is feared for the more severe outcomes, which include bloody diarrhea, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, thrombocytic thrombocytopenic purpura, and death (see Chapter 7).
      Healthy cattle harbor E. coli O157:H7 in their gastrointestinal tract (see Chapter 7), with the terminal rectum and the rectoanal junction being some of the main colonization sites, from where the bacteria are shed into the feces (Gansheroff and O'Brien, 2000, Naylor et&#xA0;al., 2003, Low et&#xA0;al., 2005, Robinson et&#xA0;al., 2009, Lim et&#xA0;al., 2010, Cote et&#xA0;al., 2015, Munns et&#xA0;al., 2015). The bovine rectoanal junction is located between the descending colon and the anal canal, and marks the abrupt transition between two cell types, the follicle-associated columnar epithelium toward the distal colon and the nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium toward the anal canal (Kudva and Dean-Nystrom, 2011, Kudva et&#xA0;al., 2012). Even after exposure to doses of bacteria as high as 1010
&#xA0;CFU, cattle remain asymptomatic (Baines et&#xA0;al., 2008). As a result, some colonized animals become supershedders and disperse very large numbers of bacteria, exceeding 104
&#xA0;CFU/g of feces (Arthur et&#xA0;al., 2010, Cote et&#xA0;al., 2015, Munns et&#xA0;al., 2015, Naylor et&#xA0;al., 2003).
      Surveys of cattle groups on Scottish farms have reported that E. coli O157 shedding was never seen on some of the farms, some farms had occasional, short periods of shedding, and a few farms showed high levels of shedding (Synge et&#xA0;al., 2003, Matthews et&#xA0;al., 2006) and that sources of variation in E. coli O157 prevalence across the farms was best supported by a model in which heterogeneities occurred mostly as the result of within-farm, rather than between-farm, differences (Matthews et&#xA0;al., 2006). In another study, 9% of cattle were high shedders, defined in the study as shedding more than 104
&#xA0;CFU/g, and these highly shedding animals were accountable for more than 96% of the bacteria that were isolated from all the animals tested (Omisakin et&#xA0;al., 2003). These results underscored that the high level of shedding in some animals may be of much higher importance than the infection prevalence of an entire cattle population (Omisakin et&#xA0;al., 2003).

E. coli O157 prevalence in cattle has been shown to be higher in the cold than in the warm months, but this trend was reversed compared with the seasonality of human infections, which were more common in the summer. This suggested that interpreting cattle prevalence data in isolation might not accurately reflect their reservoir potential and the risk of human infection. Even though the number of high-shedding cattle was similar during the cold and the warm months, high-shedding cattle were dispersing, on average, 6 times more bacteria during the summer than during the winter. This trend mirrored the number of reported human infections and pointed toward the need to determine not only the prevalence of shedding in cattle but also the extent of shedding (Ogden et&#xA0;al., 2004).
      Supershedding in cattle is shaped by the bacterial strain, the host, and the environment (Munns et&#xA0;al., 2015). For example, analyses of fecal samples in cattle from Scottish farms found a link between E. coli O157 phage type 21/28 and supershedding (Chase-Topping et&#xA0;al., 2007, Chase-Topping et&#xA0;al., 2008, Halliday et&#xA0;al., 2006). A study that sequenced the whole genome of SS17, a supershedder E. coli O157 strain, and compared it with several reference strains identified a genomic signature comprising about 60 genomic targets that could help understand the mechanistic bases of virulence and superspreading (Cote et&#xA0;al., 2015). Host-specific and rearing environment risk factors may also be responsible for high shedding (Chase-Topping et&#xA0;al., 2007, Williams et&#xA0;al., 2014). An important factor that influences supershedding is diet composition (Braden et&#xA0;al., 2004, Jacob et&#xA0;al., 2008, Callaway et&#xA0;al., 2009, Jeong et&#xA0;al., 2011, Munns et&#xA0;al., 2015). Corn-fed cattle had lower average fecal pH and higher fecal E. coli O157:H7 concentrations than did barley-fed cattle (Berg et&#xA0;al., 2004). Hay-fed cattle experimentally infected with E. coli O157:H7 shed the bacteria for longer than did grain-fed animals, and all animals remained healthy (Hovde et&#xA0;al., 1999). Increased fermentation in the hindgut, making the environment less hospitable for bacterial survival (Fox et&#xA0;al., 2007), is one suggested reason for this latter observation. This illustrate that many factors shape supershedding and superspreading, and these are influenced by intricate mechanisms.

      3.11
      Conclusions
      Understanding the transmission routes of foodborne pathogens is a challenging, thought-provoking, and critical aspect for food sciences, clinical medicine, and public health. While identifying the source of an outbreak is decisive for successfully limiting it and for preventing recurrences, implementation of the interventions is often delayed or complicated by various factors, such as the increased distances to which food products are transported, the increasing global mobility of populations, and the many processes and locations that are often involved in food preparation. This is compounded by the existence of several transmission routes and various transmission vehicles that can be exploited by certain pathogens. More than 250 known foodborne diseases affect one-third of the world population, and some segments of the population, particularly the very young, the elderly, pregnant women, and immunocompromised individuals, are an a heightened risk, pointing toward the relevance of these conditions for medicine and public health. Foodborne illnesses can be transmitted through vectors, fomites, contaminated food products, directly by person-to-person contact, from animals, or through the airborne route. As an additional layer of complexity in transmission at the level of populations, in what became known as the &#x201C;20/80 rule,&#x201D; for most infectious disease outbreaks that have been studied, a minority of hosts was found to be responsible for most transmission events. These heterogeneities in transmission have been observed in both human and animal populations, and understanding their dynamics promises to be transformative for the successful implementation of prophylactic and therapeutic interventions.

      Bibliography

              Ahmed
              A.M.

              Shimamoto
              T.

          Molecular analysis of multidrug resistance in Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H7 isolated from meat and dairy products
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          193
          2015
          68
          73
          25462925

              Aljoudi
              A.S.

              Al-Mazam
              A.

              Choudhry
              A.J.

          Outbreak of food borne Salmonella among guests of a wedding ceremony: the role of cultural factors
          Journal of Family and Community Medicine
          17
          2010
          29
          34
          22022668

              Almond
              J.W.

          Bovine spongiform encephalopathy and new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
          British Medical Bulletin
          54
          1998
          749
          759
          10326298

              Arthur
              T.M.

              Brichta-Harhay
              D.M.

              Bosilevac
              J.M.

              Kalchayanand
              N.

              Shackelford
              S.D.

              Wheeler
              T.L.

              Koohmaraie
              M.

          Super shedding of Escherichia coli O157:H7 by cattle and the impact on beef carcass contamination
          Meat Science
          86
          2010
          32
          37
          20627603

              Avery
              S.M.

              Moore
              A.

              Hutchison
              M.L.

          Fate of Escherichia coli originating from livestock faeces deposited directly onto pasture
          Letters in Applied Microbiology
          38
          2004
          355
          359
          15059203

              Bahrndorff
              S.

              Gill
              C.

              Lowenberger
              C.

              Skovgard
              H.

              Hald
              B.

          The effects of temperature and innate immunity on transmission of Campylobacter jejuni (Campylobacterales: Campylobacteraceae) between life stages of Musca domestica (Diptera: Muscidae)
          Journal of Medical Entomology
          51
          2014
          670
          677
          24897861

              Bahrndorff
              S.

              Rangstrup-Christensen
              L.

              Nordentoft
              S.

              Hald
              B.

          Foodborne disease prevention and broiler chickens with reduced Campylobacter infection
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          19
          2013
          425
          430
          23628089

              Baines
              D.

              Lee
              B.

              McAllister
              T.

          Heterogeneity in enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 fecal shedding in cattle is related to Escherichia coli O157:H7 colonization of the small and large intestine
          Canadian Journal of Microbiology
          54
          2008
          984
          995
          19096453

              Barker
              J.

              Jones
              M.V.

          The potential spread of infection caused by aerosol contamination of surfaces after flushing a domestic toilet
          Journal of Applied Microbiology
          99
          2005
          339
          347
          16033465

              Bearson
              B.L.

              Bearson
              S.M.

          The role of the QseC quorum-sensing sensor kinase in colonization and norepinephrine-enhanced motility of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
          Microbial Pathogenesis
          44
          2008
          271
          278
          17997077

              Belay
              E.D.

              Schonberger
              L.B.

          Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and bovine spongiform encephalopathy
          Clinics in Laboratory Medicine
          22
          2002
          849
          862
          (v&#x2013;vi)
          12489284

              Bell
              B.P.

              Goldoft
              M.

              Griffin
              P.M.

              Davis
              M.A.

              Gordon
              D.C.

              Tarr
              P.I.

              Bartleson
              C.A.

              Lewis
              J.H.

              Barrett
              T.J.

              Wells
              J.G.

          A multistate outbreak of Escherichia coli O157:H7-associated bloody diarrhea and hemolytic uremic syndrome from hamburgers. The Washington experience
          Journal of the American Medical Association
          272
          1994
          1349
          1353
          7933395

              Berg
              J.

              McAllister
              T.

              Bach
              S.

              Stilborn
              R.

              Hancock
              D.

              LeJeune
              J.

          Escherichia coli O157:H7 excretion by commercial feedlot cattle fed either barley- or corn-based finishing diets
          Journal of Food Protection
          67
          2004
          666
          671
          15083716

              Beutin
              L.

              Martin
              A.

          Outbreak of Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) O104:H4 infection in Germany causes a paradigm shift with regard to human pathogenicity of STEC strains
          Journal of Food Protection
          75
          2012
          408
          418
          22289607

              Birkhead
              G.S.

              Morse
              D.L.

              Levine
              W.C.

              Fudala
              J.K.

              Kondracki
              S.F.

              Chang
              H.G.

              Shayegani
              M.

              Novick
              L.

              Blake
              P.A.

          Typhoid fever at a resort hotel in New York: a large outbreak with an unusual vehicle
          Journal of Infectious Diseases
          167
          1993
          1228
          1232
          8486960

              Bolzoni
              L.

              Real
              L.

              De Leo
              G.

          Transmission heterogeneity and control strategies for infectious disease emergence
          PLoS One
          2
          2007
          e747
          17712403

              Borriello
              G.

              Peletto
              S.

              Lucibelli
              M.G.

              Acutis
              P.L.

              Ercolini
              D.

              Galiero
              G.

          Link between geographical origin and occurrence of Brucella abortus biovars in cow and water buffalo herds
          Applied and Environmental Microbiologyl
          79
          2013
          1039
          1043

              Braden
              K.W.

              Blanton
              J.R.
              Jr.

              Allen
              V.G.

              Pond
              K.R.

              Miller
              M.F.

          Ascophyllum nodosum supplementation: a preharvest intervention for reducing Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella spp. in feedlot steers
          Journal of Food Protection
          67
          2004
          1824
          1828
          15453570

              Bradley
              R.

              Wilesmith
              J.W.

          Epidemiology and control of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)
          British Medical Bulletin
          49
          1993
          932
          959
          8137136

              Brewer
              M.S.

          Bovine spongiform encephalopathy&#x2013;food safety implications
          Advances in Food and Nutrition Research
          43
          2001
          265
          317
          11285685

              Brook
              I.

          Infant botulism
          Journal of Perinatology
          27
          2007
          175
          180
          17314986

              Brown
              P.

              Will
              R.G.

              Bradley
              R.

              Asher
              D.M.

              Detwiler
              L.

          Bovine spongiform encephalopathy and variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: background, evolution, and current concerns
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          7
          2001
          6
          16
          11266289

              Burningham
              M.D.

              Walter
              F.G.

              Mechem
              C.

              Haber
              J.

              Ekins
              B.R.

          Wound botulism
          Annals of Emergency Medicine
          24
          1994
          1184
          1187
          7978607

              Butler
              A.J.

              Thomas
              M.K.

              Pintar
              K.D.

          Expert elicitation as a means to attribute 28 enteric pathogens to foodborne, waterborne, animal contact, and person-to-person transmission routes in Canada
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          12
          2015
          335
          344
          25835810

              Callaway
              T.R.

              Carr
              M.A.

              Edrington
              T.S.

              Anderson
              R.C.

              Nisbet
              D.J.

          Diet, Escherichia coli O157:H7, and cattle: a review after 10 years
          Current Issues in Molecular Biology
          11
          2009
          67
          79
          19351974

              Callaway
              T.R.

              Morrow
              J.L.

              Edrington
              T.S.

              Genovese
              K.J.

              Dowd
              S.

              Carroll
              J.

              Dailey
              J.W.

              Harvey
              R.B.

              Poole
              T.L.

              Anderson
              R.C.

              Nisbet
              D.J.

          Social stress increases fecal shedding of Salmonella typhimurium by early weaned piglets
          Current Issues in Intestinal Microbiology
          7
          2006
          65
          71
          16875421

              Capparelli
              R.

              Parlato
              M.

              Iannaccone
              M.

              Roperto
              S.

              Marabelli
              R.

              Roperto
              F.

              Iannelli
              D.

          Heterogeneous shedding of Brucella abortus in milk and its effect on the control of animal brucellosis
          Journal of Applied Microbiology
          106
          2009
          2041
          2047
          19298512

              Casas
              M.

              Martin
              M.

          Hepatitis E virus and pigs: a zoonotic risk in Europe?
          Veterinary Journal
          186
          2010
          135
          136

              Castro
              A.

              Santos
              C.

              Meireles
              H.

              Silva
              J.

              Teixeira
              P.

          Food handlers as potential sources of dissemination of virulent strains of Staphylococcus aureus in the community
          Journal of Infection and Public Health
          9
          2
          2016
          153
          160
          26424093

              Caul
              E.O.

          Small round structured viruses: airborne transmission and hospital control
          Lancet
          343
          1994
          1240
          1242
          7910270

              Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

          Botulism from drinking prison-made illicit alcohol &#x2013; Utah 2011
          MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
          61
          2012
          782
          784
          23034585

              Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

          Notes from the field: botulism from drinking prison-made illicit alcohol &#x2013; Arizona, 2012
          MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
          62
          2013
          88
          23388552

              Chakrabarti
              P.

          Curing cholera: pathogens, places and poverty in South Asia
          International Journal of South Asian Studies (New Delhi)
          3
          2010
          153
          168

              Chao
              D.L.

              Longini
              I.M.
              Jr.

              Halloran
              M.E.

          The effects of vector movement and distribution in a mathematical model of dengue transmission
          PLoS One
          8
          2013
          e76044
          24204590

              Chase-Topping
              M.

              Gally
              D.

              Low
              C.

              Matthews
              L.

              Woolhouse
              M.

          Super-shedding and the link between human infection and livestock carriage of Escherichia coli O157
          Nature Reviews in Microbiology
          6
          2008
          904
          912
          19008890

        Chase-Topping, M.E., McKendrick, I.J., Pearce, M.C., MacDonald, P., Matthews, L., Halliday, J., Allison, L., Fenlon, D., Low, J.C., Gunn, G., Woolhouse, M.E.., 2007. Risk factors for the presence of high-level shedders of Escherichia coli O157 on Scottish farms. 45, 1594&#x2013;1603.

              Cherington
              M.

          Clinical spectrum of botulism
          Muscle and Nerve
          21
          1998
          701
          710
          9585323

              Chia
              J.K.

              Clark
              J.B.

              Ryan
              C.A.

              Pollack
              M.

          Botulism in an adult associated with food-borne intestinal infection with Clostridium botulinum
          New England Journal of Medicine
          315
          1986
          239
          241
          3523248

              Chitarra
              W.

              Decastelli
              L.

              Garibaldi
              A.

              Gullino
              M.L.

          Potential uptake of Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Listeria monocytogenes from growth substrate into leaves of salad plants and basil grown in soil irrigated with contaminated water
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          189
          2014
          139
          145
          25150671

              Cogan
              T.A.

              Bloomfield
              S.F.

              Humphrey
              T.J.

          The effectiveness of hygiene procedures for prevention of cross-contamination from chicken carcases in the domestic kitchen
          Letters in Applied Microbiology
          29
          1999
          354
          358
          10664978

              Cogan
              T.A.

              Slader
              J.

              Bloomfield
              S.F.

              Humphrey
              T.J.

          Achieving hygiene in the domestic kitchen: the effectiveness of commonly used cleaning procedures
          Journal of Applied Microbiology
          92
          2002
          885
          892
          11972693

              Colby
              D.W.

              Prusiner
              S.B.

          Prions
          Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
          3
          2011
          a006833
          21421910

              Collee
              J.G.

              Bradley
              R.

              Liberski
              P.P.

          Variant CJD (vCJD) and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE): 10 and 20 years on: part 2
          Folia Neuropathologica
          44
          2006
          102
          110
          16823692

              Collinge
              J.

              Beck
              J.

              Campbell
              T.

              Estibeiro
              K.

              Will
              R.G.

          Prion protein gene analysis in new variant cases of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
          Lancet
          348
          1996
          56

              Collinge
              J.

              Whitfield
              J.

              McKintosh
              E.

              Beck
              J.

              Mead
              S.

              Thomas
              D.J.

              Alpers
              M.P.

          Kuru in the 21st century&#x2013;an acquired human prion disease with very long incubation periods
          Lancet
          367
          2006
          2068
          2074
          16798390

              Cook
              N.

              Bridger
              J.

              Kendall
              K.

              Gomara
              M.I.

              El-Attar
              L.

              Gray
              J.

          The zoonotic potential of rotavirus
          The Journal of Infection
          48
          2004
          289
          302
          15066329

              Coral-Almeida
              M.

              Gabriel
              S.

              Abatih
              E.N.

              Praet
              N.

              Benitez
              W.

              Dorny
              P.

          Taenia solium human cysticercosis: a systematic review of Sero-epidemiological data from endemic zones around the world
          PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases
          9
          2015
          e0003919
          26147942

              Cossaboom
              C.M.

              Heffron
              C.L.

              Cao
              D.

              Yugo
              D.M.

              Houk-Miles
              A.E.

              Lindsay
              D.S.

              Zajac
              A.M.

              Bertke
              A.S.

              Elvinger
              F.

              Meng
              X.J.

          Risk factors and sources of foodborne hepatitis E virus infection in the United States
          Journal of Medical Virology
          88
          9
          2016
          1641
          1645
          26889628

              Cossart
              P.

              Lebreton
              A.

          A trip in the &#x201C;New Microbiology&#x201D; with the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes
          FEBS Letters
          588
          2014
          2437
          2445
          24911203

              Cote
              R.

              Katani
              R.

              Moreau
              M.R.

              Kudva
              I.T.

              Arthur
              T.M.

              DebRoy
              C.

              Mwangi
              M.M.

              Albert
              I.

              Raygoza Garay
              J.A.

              Li
              L.

              Brandl
              M.T.

              Carter
              M.Q.

              Kapur
              V.

          Comparative analysis of super-shedder strains of Escherichia coli O157:H7 reveals distinctive genomic features and a strongly aggregative adherent phenotype on bovine rectoanal junction squamous epithelial cells
          PLoS One
          10
          2015
          e0116743
          25664460

              Cronin
              J.P.

              Welsh
              M.E.

              Dekkers
              M.G.

              Abercrombie
              S.T.

              Mitchell
              C.E.

          Host physiological phenotype explains pathogen reservoir potential
          Ecology Letters
          13
          2010
          1221
          1232
          20618842

              Crowe
              S.J.

              Mahon
              B.E.

              Vieira
              A.R.

              Gould
              L.H.

          Vital signs: multistate foodborne outbreaks &#x2013; United States, 2010&#x2013;2014
          MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
          64
          2015
          1221
          1225
          26540483

              Curtis
              V.

              Cairncross
              S.

              Yonli
              R.

          Domestic hygiene and diarrhoea - pinpointing the problem
          Tropical Medecine and International Health
          5
          2000
          22
          32

              De Jesus
              A.J.

              Olsen
              A.R.

              Bryce
              J.R.

              Whiting
              R.C.

          Quantitative contamination and transfer of Escherichia coli from foods by houseflies, Musca domestica L. (Diptera: Muscidae)
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          93
          2004
          259
          262
          15135963

              de Vos
              C.J.

              Heres
              L.

          The BSE risk of processing meat and bone meal in nonruminant feed: a quantitative assessment for the Netherlands
          Risk Analysis
          29
          2009
          541
          557
          19144064

              Del Brutto
              O.H.

          Human cysticercosis (Taenia solium)
          Tropical Parasitology
          3
          2013
          100
          103
          24470991

              Dennehy
              P.H.

          Transmission of rotavirus and other enteric pathogens in the home
          Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal
          19
          2000
          S103
          S105
          11052397

              Dennehy
              P.H.

              Nelson
              S.M.

              Crowley
              B.A.

              Saracen
              C.L.

          Detection of rotavirus RNA in hospital air samples by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
          Pediatric Research
          43
          1998
          143A

              Devi
              S.J.

              Murray
              C.J.

          Cockroaches (Blatta and Periplaneta species) as reservoirs of drug-resistant salmonellas
          Epidemiology and Infection
          107
          1991
          357
          361
          1936157

              Dhama
              K.

              Rajagunalan
              S.

              Chakraborty
              S.

              Verma
              A.K.

              Kumar
              A.

              Tiwari
              R.

              Kapoor
              S.

          Food-borne pathogens of animal origin-diagnosis, prevention, control and their zoonotic significance: a review
          Pakistan Journal of Biologocial Sciences
          16
          2013
          1076
          1085

              DiCaprio
              E.

              Culbertson
              D.

              Li
              J.

          Evidence of the internalization of animal caliciviruses via the roots of growing strawberry plants and dissemination to the fruit
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          81
          2015
          2727
          2734
          25662970

              Dormont
              D.

          Prions, BSE and food
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          78
          2002
          181
          189
          12222633

              Eisenberg
              J.N.

              Trostle
              J.

              Sorensen
              R.J.

              Shields
              K.F.

          Toward a systems approach to enteric pathogen transmission: from individual independence to community interdependence
          Annual Review of Public Health
          33
          2012
          239
          257

              Epp
              T.

              Parker
              S.

          Factors in foodborne disease control: a brief overview of issues in changing zoonotic disease transmission and the roles of public health and veterinary professionals
          Journal of Agromedicine
          14
          2009
          228
          234
          19437282

              Erickson
              M.C.

              Webb
              C.C.

              Diaz-Perez
              J.C.

              Phatak
              S.C.

              Silvoy
              J.J.

              Davey
              L.

              Payton
              A.S.

              Liao
              J.

              Ma
              L.

              Doyle
              M.P.

          Surface and internalized Escherichia coli O157:H7 on field-grown spinach and lettuce treated with spray-contaminated irrigation water
          Journal of Food Protection
          73
          2010
          1023
          1029
          20537256

              Fenicia
              L.

              Anniballi
              F.

          Infant botulism
          Annali dell&#x2019;Istituto Superiore di Sanita
          45
          2009
          134
          146

              Fischer
              A.R.

              De Jong
              A.E.

              Van Asselt
              E.D.

              De Jonge
              R.

              Frewer
              L.J.

              Nauta
              M.J.

          Food safety in the domestic environment: an interdisciplinary investigation of microbial hazards during food preparation
          Risk Analysis
          27
          2007
          1065
          1082
          17958512

              Fone
              D.L.

              Lane
              W.

              Salmon
              R.L.

          Investigation of an outbreak of gastroenteritis at a hospital for patients with learning difficulties
          Communicable Disease and Public Health
          2
          1999
          35
          38
          10462893

              Forster
              M.

              Klimpel
              S.

              Mehlhorn
              H.

              Sievert
              K.

              Messler
              S.

              Pfeffer
              K.

          Pilot study on synanthropic flies (e.g. Musca, Sarcophaga, Calliphora, Fannia, Lucilia, Stomoxys) as vectors of pathogenic microorganisms
          Parasitology Research
          101
          2007
          243
          246
          17370089

              Fox
              J.T.

              Depenbusch
              B.E.

              Drouillard
              J.S.

              Nagaraja
              T.G.

          Dry-rolled or steam-flaked grain-based diets and fecal shedding of Escherichia coli O157 in feedlot cattle
          Journal of Animal Science
          85
          2007
          1207
          1212
          17224458

              Franck
              K.T.

              Lisby
              M.

              Fonager
              J.

              Schultz
              A.C.

              Bottiger
              B.

              Villif
              A.

              Absalonsen
              H.

              Ethelberg
              S.

          Sources of Calicivirus contamination in foodborne outbreaks in Denmark, 2005-2011&#x2013;the role of the asymptomatic food handler
          Journal of Infectious Diseases
          211
          2015
          563
          570
          25156563

              Franz
              E.

              Visser
              A.A.

              Van Diepeningen
              A.D.

              Klerks
              M.M.

              Termorshuizen
              A.J.

              van Bruggen
              A.H.

          Quantification of contamination of lettuce by GFP-expressing Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
          Food Microbiology
          24
          2007
          106
          112
          16943102

              Fravalo
              P.

              Laisney
              M.J.

              Gillard
              M.O.

              Salvat
              G.

              Chemaly
              M.

          Campylobacter transfer from naturally contaminated chicken thighs to cutting boards is inversely related to initial load
          Journal of Food Protection
          72
          2009
          1836
          1840
          19777883

              Gajdusek
              D.C.

          Unconventional viruses and the origin and disappearance of kuru
          Science
          197
          1977
          943
          960
          142303

              Gansheroff
              L.J.

              O&#x2019;Brien
              A.D.

          Escherichia coli O157:H7 in beef cattle presented for slaughter in the U.S.: higher prevalence rates than previously estimated
          Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
          97
          2000
          2959
          2961
          10737775

              Garcia
              F.

              Notario
              M.J.

              Cabanas
              J.M.

              Jordano
              R.

              Medina
              L.M.

          Incidence of bacteria of public health interest carried by cockroaches in different food-related environments
          Journal of Medical Entomology
          49
          2012
          1481
          1484
          23270179

              Garcia
              H.H.

              Del Brutto
              O.H.

          Taenia solium cysticercosis
          Infectious Disease Clinics of North America
          14
          2000
          97
          119
          ix
          10738675

              Garrec
              N.

              Picard-Bonnaud
              F.

              Pourcher
              A.M.

          Occurrence of Listeria sp and L monocytogenes in sewage sludge used for land application: effect of dewatering, liming and storage in tank on survival of Listeria species
          FEMS Immunology and Medical Microbiology
          35
          2003
          275
          283
          12648847

              Garrido
              V.

              Vitas
              A.I.

              Garc&#xED;a-Jal&#xF3;n
              I.

          Survey of Listeria monocytogenes in ready-to-eat products: prevalence by brands and retail establishments for exposure assessment of listeriosis in Northern Spain
          Food Control
          20
          2009
          986
          991

              Garske
              T.

              Rhodes
              C.J.

          The effect of superspreading on epidemic outbreak size distributions
          Journal of Theoretical Biology
          253
          2008
          228
          237
          18423673

              Gibbs
              C.J.
              Jr.

              Gajdusek
              D.C.

              Latarjet
              R.

          Unusual resistance to ionizing radiation of the viruses of kuru, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and scrapie
          Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
          75
          1978
          6268
          6270
          104301

              Giles
              K.

              Glidden
              D.V.

              Beckwith
              R.

              Seoanes
              R.

              Peretz
              D.

              DeArmond
              S.J.

              Prusiner
              S.B.

          Resistance of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) prions to inactivation
          PLoS Pathogens
          4
          2008
          e1000206
          19008948

              Gilman
              R.H.

              Gonzalez
              A.E.

              Llanos-Zavalaga
              F.

              Tsang
              V.C.

              Garcia
              H.H.

          Prevention and control of Taenia solium taeniasis/cysticercosis in Peru
          Pathogens and Global Health
          106
          2012
          312
          318
          23265557

              Gonzalez-Escobedo
              G.

              Marshall
              J.M.

              Gunn
              J.S.

          Chronic and acute infection of the gall bladder by Salmonella Typhi: understanding the carrier state
          Nature Reviews in Microbiology
          9
          2011
          9
          14
          21113180

              Goonetilleke
              A.

              Harris
              J.B.

          Clostridial neurotoxins
          Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry
          75
          Suppl. 3
          2004
          iii35-39

              Greene
              S.K.

              Daly
              E.R.

              Talbot
              E.A.

              Demma
              L.J.

              Holzbauer
              S.

              Patel
              N.J.

              Hill
              T.A.

              Walderhaug
              M.O.

              Hoekstra
              R.M.

              Lynch
              M.F.

              Painter
              J.A.

          Recurrent multistate outbreak of Salmonella Newport associated with tomatoes from contaminated fields, 2005
          Epidemiology and Infection
          136
          2008
          157
          165
          17475091

              Greig
              J.D.

              Todd
              E.C.

              Bartleson
              C.A.

              Michaels
              B.S.

          Outbreaks where food workers have been implicated in the spread of foodborne disease. Part 1. Description of the problem, methods, and agents involved
          Journal of Food Protection
          70
          2007
          1752
          1761
          17685355

              Griffin
              P.M.

              Ostroff
              S.M.

              Tauxe
              R.V.

              Greene
              K.D.

              Wells
              J.G.

              Lewis
              J.H.

              Blake
              P.A.

          Illnesses associated with Escherichia coli O157:H7 infections. A broad clinical spectrum
          Annals of Internal Medicine
          109
          1988
          705
          712
          3056169

              Grobben
              A.H.

              Steele
              P.J.

              Somerville
              R.A.

              Taylor
              D.M.

              Schreuder
              B.E.

          Inactivation of the BSE agent by the heat and pressure process for manufacturing gelatine
          The Veterinary Record
          157
          2005
          277
          281
          16157568

              Guyard-Nicodeme
              M.

              Tresse
              O.

              Houard
              E.

              Jugiau
              F.

              Courtillon
              C.

              El Manaa
              K.

              Laisney
              M.J.

              Chemaly
              M.

          Characterization of Campylobacter spp. transferred from naturally contaminated chicken legs to cooked chicken slices via a cutting board
          International Journal of Food Microbiologyogy
          164
          2013
          7
          14

              Hald
              B.

              Skovgard
              H.

              Pedersen
              K.

              Bunkenborg
              H.

          Influxed insects as vectors for Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli in Danish broiler houses
          Poultry Science
          87
          2008
          1428
          1434

              Haley
              B.J.

              Sonnier
              J.

              Schukken
              Y.H.

              Karns
              J.S.

              Van Kessel
              J.A.

          Diversity of Listeria monocytogenes within a U.S. dairy herd, 2004-2010
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          12
          2015
          844
          850
          26325149

              Hall
              G.

              Vally
              H.

              Kirk
              M.

          Foodborne illnesses: overview
          International Encyclopedia of Public Health
          2008
          638
          653

              Halliday
              J.E.

              Chase-Topping
              M.E.

              Pearce
              M.C.

              McKendrick
              I.J.

              Allison
              L.

              Fenlon
              D.

              Low
              C.

              Mellor
              D.J.

              Gunn
              G.J.

              Woolhouse
              M.E.

          Herd-level risk factors associated with the presence of Phage type 21/28 E. coli O157 on Scottish cattle farms
          BMC Microbiology
          6
          2006
          99
          17140453

              Halliday
              S.

          Death and miasma in Victorian London: an obstinate belief
          British Medical Journal
          323
          2001
          1469
          1471
          11751359

              Harbaugh
              E.

              Trampel
              D.

              Wesley
              I.

              Hoff
              S.

              Griffith
              R.

              Hurd
              H.S.

          Rapid aerosol transmission of Salmonella among turkeys in a simulated holding-shed environment
          Poultry Science
          85
          2006
          1693
          1699

              Havelaar
              A.H.

              Galindo
              A.V.

              Kurowicka
              D.

              Cooke
              R.M.

          Attribution of foodborne pathogens using structured expert elicitation
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          5
          2008
          649
          659
          18687052

              Herwaldt
              B.L.

              Ackers
              M.L.

          An outbreak in 1996 of cyclosporiasis associated with imported raspberries. The Cyclospora Working Group
          New England Journal of Medicine
          336
          1997
          1548
          1556
          9164810

              Holman
              E.J.

              Allen
              K.S.

              Holguin
              J.R.

              Torno
              M.

              Lachica
              M.

          A community outbreak of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium associated with an asymptomatic food handler in two local restaurants
          Journal of Environmental Health
          77
          2014
          18
          20
          25226780

              Hovde
              C.J.

              Austin
              P.R.

              Cloud
              K.A.

              Williams
              C.J.

              Hunt
              C.W.

          Effect of cattle diet on Escherichia coli O157:H7 acid resistance
          Applied and Environmental Microbiologyl
          65
          1999
          3233
          3235

              Ijaz
              M.K.

              Sattar
              S.A.

              Johnson-Lussenburg
              C.M.

              Springthorpe
              V.S.

              Nair
              R.C.

          Effect of relative humidity, atmospheric temperature, and suspending medium on the airborne survival of human rotavirus
          Canadian Journal of Microbiology
          31
          1985
          681
          685
          3000566

              Itoh
              Y.

              Sugita-Konishi
              Y.

              Kasuga
              F.

              Iwaki
              M.

              Hara-Kudo
              Y.

              Saito
              N.

              Noguchi
              Y.

              Konuma
              H.

              Kumagai
              S.

          Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 present in radish sprouts
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          64
          1998
          1532
          1535
          9546189

              Ivanek
              R.

              Grohn
              Y.T.

              Wiedmann
              M.

          Listeria monocytogenes in multiple habitats and host populations: review of available data for mathematical modeling
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          3
          2006
          319
          336
          17199514

              Iwabuchi
              E.

              Maruyama
              N.

              Hara
              A.

              Nishimura
              M.

              Muramatsu
              M.

              Ochiai
              T.

              Hirai
              K.

          Nationwide survey of salmonella prevalence in environmental dust from layer farms in Japan
          Journal of Food Protection
          73
          2010
          1993
          2000
          21219710

              Jacob
              M.E.

              Parsons
              G.L.

              Shelor
              M.K.

              Fox
              J.T.

              Drouillard
              J.S.

              Thomson
              D.U.

              Renter
              D.G.

              Nagaraja
              T.G.

          Feeding supplemental dried distiller&#x2019;s grains increases faecal shedding of Escherichia coli O157 in experimentally inoculated calves
          Zoonoses Public Health
          55
          2008
          125
          132
          18331514

              Janeway
              C.M.

              Goldfield
              M.

              Altman
              R.

              Rosenfeld
              H.

              Jedynak
              C.

              Moulton
              D.

              Lezynski
              W.

          Foodborne outbreak of gastroenteritis possibily of multiple bacterial etiology
          American Journal of Epidemiology
          94
          1971
          135
          141
          4327996

              Jayarao
              B.M.

              Donaldson
              S.C.

              Straley
              B.A.

              Sawant
              A.A.

              Hegde
              N.V.

              Brown
              J.L.

          A survey of foodborne pathogens in bulk tank milk and raw milk consumption among farm families in Pennsylvania
          Journal of Dairy Science
          89
          2006
          2451
          2458
          16772561

              Jensen
              D.A.

              Friedrich
              L.M.

              Harris
              L.J.

              Danyluk
              M.D.

              Schaffner
              D.W.

          Quantifying transfer rates of Salmonella and Escherichia coli O157:H7 between fresh-cut produce and common kitchen surfaces
          Journal of Food Protection
          76
          2013
          1530
          1538
          23992497

              Jensen
              D.A.

              Friedrich
              L.M.

              Harris
              L.J.

              Danyluk
              M.D.

              Schaffner
              D.W.

          Cross contamination of Escherichia coli O157:H7 between lettuce and wash water during home-scale washing
          Food Microbiology
          46
          2015
          428
          433
          25475312

              Jeong
              K.C.

              Kang
              M.Y.

              Kang
              J.

              Baumler
              D.J.

              Kaspar
              C.W.

          Reduction of Escherichia coli O157:H7 shedding in cattle by addition of chitosan microparticles to feed
          Applied and Environmental Microbiologyl
          77
          2011
          2611
          2616

              Jiang
              X.

              Doyle
              M.P.

          Fate of Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella Enteritidis on currency
          Journal of Food Protection
          62
          1999
          805
          807
          10419277

              Jones
              R.M.

              Brosseau
              L.M.

          Aerosol transmission of infectious disease
          Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine
          57
          2015
          501
          508
          25816216

              Julia
              C.

              Valleron
              A.J.

          Louis-Rene Villerme (1782&#x2013;1863), a pioneer in social epidemiology: re-analysis of his data on comparative mortality in Paris in the early 19th century
          Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
          65
          2011
          666
          670
          19767321

              Jung
              M.J.

              Pistolesi
              D.

              Pana
              A.

          Prions, prion diseases and decontamination
          Igiene e Sanita Pubblica
          59
          2003
          331
          344
          14981553

              Kalyoussef
              S.

              Feja
              K.N.

          Foodborne illnesses
          Adv Pediatr
          61
          2014
          287
          312
          25037134

              Karamanou
              M.

              Panayiotakopoulos
              G.

              Tsoucalas
              G.

              Kousoulis
              A.A.

              Androutsos
              G.

          From miasmas to germs: a historical approach to theories of infectious disease transmission
          Le Infezioni in Medicina : Rivista Periodica di Eziologia, Epidemiologia, Diagnostica, Clinica e Terapia delle Patologie Infettive
          20
          2012
          58
          62

              Kawata
              K.

          Water and other environmental interventions&#x2013;the minimum investment concept
          The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
          31
          1978
          2114
          2123
          102181

              Keskinen
              L.A.

              Todd
              E.C.

              Ryser
              E.T.

          Transfer of surface-dried Listeria monocytogenes from stainless steel knife blades to roast Turkey breast
          Journal of Food Protection
          71
          2008
          176
          181
          18236680

              Kilpatrick
              A.M.

              Daszak
              P.

              Jones
              M.J.

              Marra
              P.P.

              Kramer
              L.D.

          Host heterogeneity dominates West Nile virus transmission
          Proceedings in Biological Sciences
          273
          2006
          2327
          2333

              Kimura
              A.C.

              Palumbo
              M.S.

              Meyers
              H.

              Abbott
              S.

              Rodriguez
              R.

              Werner
              S.B.

          A multi-state outbreak of Salmonella serotype Thompson infection from commercially distributed bread contaminated by an ill food handler
          Epidemiology and Infection
          133
          2005
          823
          828
          16181501

              King
              L.A.

              Loukiadis
              E.

              Mariani-Kurkdjian
              P.

              Haeghebaert
              S.

              Weill
              F.X.

              Baliere
              C.

              Ganet
              S.

              Gouali
              M.

              Vaillant
              V.

              Pihier
              N.

              Callon
              H.

              Novo
              R.

              Gaillot
              O.

              Thevenot-Sergentet
              D.

              Bingen
              E.

              Chaud
              P.

              de Valk
              H.

          Foodborne transmission of sorbitol-fermenting Escherichia coli O157:[H7] via ground beef: an outbreak in northern France, 2011
          Clinical Microbiology and Infection
          20
          2014
          O1136
          O1144
          24962059

              Kirking
              H.L.

              Cortes
              J.

              Burrer
              S.

              Hall
              A.J.

              Cohen
              N.J.

              Lipman
              H.

              Kim
              C.

              Daly
              E.R.

              Fishbein
              D.B.

          Likely transmission of norovirus on an airplane, October 2008
          Clinical Infectious Diseases
          50
          2010
          1216
          1221
          20353365

              Koch
              T.

          Disease mapping
          International Encyclopedia of Human Geography
          2009
          234
          241

              Koch
              T.

              Denike
              K.

          Crediting his critics&#x2019; concerns: remaking John Snow&#x2019;s map of Broad Street cholera, 1854
          Social Science and Medicine
          69
          2009
          1246
          1251
          19716638

              Koopmans
              M.

              von Bonsdorff
              C.H.

              Vinje
              J.

              de Medici
              D.

              Monroe
              S.

          Foodborne viruses
          FEMS Microbiology Reviews
          26
          2002
          187
          205
          12069883

              Kosa
              K.M.

              Cates
              S.C.

              Bradley
              S.

              Chambers
              E.t.

              Godwin
              S.

          Consumer-reported handling of raw poultry products at home: results from a national survey
          Journal of Food Protection
          78
          2015
          180
          186
          25581194

              Kudva
              I.T.

              Dean-Nystrom
              E.A.

          Bovine recto-anal junction squamous epithelial (RSE) cell adhesion assay for studying Escherichia coli O157 adherence
          Journal of Applied Microbiology
          111
          2011
          1283
          1294
          21883734

              Kudva
              I.T.

              Griffin
              R.W.

              Krastins
              B.

              Sarracino
              D.A.

              Calderwood
              S.B.

              John
              M.

          Proteins other than the locus of enterocyte effacement-encoded proteins contribute to Escherichia coli O157:H7 adherence to bovine rectoanal junction stratified squamous epithelial cells
          BMC Microbiology
          12
          2012
          103
          22691138

              Kusumaningrum
              H.D.

              Riboldi
              G.

              Hazeleger
              W.C.

              Beumer
              R.R.

          Survival of foodborne pathogens on stainless steel surfaces and cross-contamination to foods
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          85
          2003
          227
          236
          12878381

              Lawrence
              D.T.

              Dobmeier
              S.G.

              Bechtel
              L.K.

              Holstege
              C.P.

          Food poisoning
          Emergency Medicine Clinics of North America
          25
          2007
          357
          373
          abstract ix
          17482025

              Layton
              M.C.

              Calliste
              S.G.

              Gomez
              T.M.

              Patton
              C.

              Brooks
              S.

          A mixed foodborne outbreak with Salmonella heidelberg and Campylobacter jejuni in a nursing home
          Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology
          18
          1997
          115
          121
          9120239

              Li
              J.

              Paredes-Sabja
              D.

              Sarker
              M.R.

              McClane
              B.A.

          Further characterization of Clostridium perfringens small acid soluble protein-4 (Ssp4) properties and expression
          PLoS One
          4
          2009
          e6249
          19609432

              Li
              Y.

              Yu
              I.T.

              Xu
              P.

              Lee
              J.H.

              Wong
              T.W.

              Ooi
              P.L.

              Sleigh
              A.C.

          Predicting super spreading events during the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemics in Hong Kong and Singapore
          American Journal of Epidemiology
          160
          2004
          719
          728
          15466494

              Liberski
              P.P.

          Kuru: a journey back in time from Papua New Guinea to the neanderthals&#x2019; extinction
          Pathogens
          2
          2013
          472
          505
          25437203

              Liebman
              K.A.

              Stoddard
              S.T.

              Reiner
              R.C.
              Jr.

              Perkins
              T.A.

              Astete
              H.

              Sihuincha
              M.

              Halsey
              E.S.

              Kochel
              T.J.

              Morrison
              A.C.

              Scott
              T.W.

          Determinants of heterogeneous blood feeding patterns by Aedes aegypti in Iquitos, Peru
          PLoS Negl Trop Dis
          8
          2014
          e2702
          24551262

              Liemann
              S.

              Glockshuber
              R.

          Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
          Biochemical and Biophysical and Research Communications
          250
          1998
          187
          193

              Lim
              J.Y.

              Yoon
              J.

              Hovde
              C.J.

          A brief overview of Escherichia coli O157:H7 and its plasmid O157
          Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology
          20
          2010
          5
          14
          20134227

              Linke
              K.

              Ruckerl
              I.

              Brugger
              K.

              Karpiskova
              R.

              Walland
              J.

              Muri-Klinger
              S.

              Tichy
              A.

              Wagner
              M.

              Stessl
              B.

          Reservoirs of listeria species in three environmental ecosystems
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          80
          2014
          5583
          5592
          25002422

              Low
              J.C.

              McKendrick
              I.J.

              McKechnie
              C.

              Fenlon
              D.

              Naylor
              S.W.

              Currie
              C.

              Smith
              D.G.

              Allison
              L.

              Gally
              D.L.

          Rectal carriage of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157 in slaughtered cattle
          Applied and Environmental Microbiologyl
          71
          2005
          93
          97

              Lozniewski
              A.

              Humbert
              A.

              Corsaro
              D.

              Schwartzbrod
              J.

              Weber
              M.

              Le Faou
              A.

          Comparison of sludge and clinical isolates of Listeria monocytogenes
          Letters in Applied Microbiology
          32
          2001
          336
          339
          11328501

              Lues
              J.F.

              Theron
              M.M.

              Venter
              P.

              Rasephei
              M.H.

          Microbial composition in bioaerosols of a high-throughput chicken-slaughtering facility
          Poultry Science
          86
          2007
          142
          149

              Lund
              B.M.

              O&#x2019;Brien
              S.J.

          The occurrence and prevention of foodborne disease in vulnerable people
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          8
          2011
          961
          973
          21561383

              Manuel
              D.

              Neamatullah
              S.

              Shahin
              R.

              Reymond
              D.

              Keystone
              J.

              Carlson
              J.

              Le Ber
              C.

              Herwaldt
              B.

              Werker
              D.

          An outbreak of cyclosporiasis in 1996 associated with consumption of fresh berries- Ontario
          Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases
          11
          2000
          86
          92
          18159270

              Manuel
              D.G.

              Shahin
              R.

              Lee
              W.

              Grmusa
              M.

          The first reported cluster of food-borne cyclosporiasis in Canada
          Canadian Journal of Public Health
          90
          1999
          399
          402
          10680266

              Marder
              E.P.

              Garman
              K.N.

              Ingram
              L.A.

              Dunn
              J.R.

          Multistate outbreak of Escherichia coli O157:H7 associated with bagged salad
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          11
          2014
          593
          595
          24823788

              Marg
              H.

              Scholz
              H.C.

              Arnold
              T.

              Rosler
              U.

              Hensel
              A.

          Influence of long-time transportation stress on re-activation of Salmonella typhimurium DT104 in experimentally infected pigs
          Berliner und Munchener tierarztliche Wochenschrift
          114
          2001
          385
          388
          11570185

              Marineli
              F.

              Tsoucalas
              G.

              Karamanou
              M.

              Androutsos
              G.

          Mary Mallon (1869-1938) and the history of typhoid fever
          Annals of Gastroenterology
          26
          2013
          132
          134
          24714738

              Marks
              P.J.

              Vipond
              I.B.

              Carlisle
              D.

              Deakin
              D.

              Fey
              R.E.

              Caul
              E.O.

          Evidence for airborne transmission of Norwalk-like virus (NLV) in a hotel restaurant
          Epidemiology and Infection
          124
          2000
          481
          487
          10982072

              Marks
              P.J.

              Vipond
              I.B.

              Regan
              F.M.

              Wedgwood
              K.

              Fey
              R.E.

              Caul
              E.O.

          A school outbreak of Norwalk-like virus: evidence for airborne transmission
          Epidemiology and Infection
          131
          2003
          727
          736
          12948373

              Marshall
              J.A.

              Yuen
              L.K.

              Catton
              M.G.

              Gunesekere
              I.C.

              Wright
              P.J.

              Bettelheim
              K.A.

              Griffith
              J.M.

              Lightfoot
              D.

              Hogg
              G.G.

              Gregory
              J.

              Wilby
              R.

              Gaston
              J.

          Multiple outbreaks of Norwalk-like virus gastro-enteritis associated with a Mediterranean-style restaurant
          Journal of Medical Microbiology
          50
          2001
          143
          151
          11211221

              Matthews
              L.

              McKendrick
              I.J.

              Ternent
              H.

              Gunn
              G.J.

              Synge
              B.

              Woolhouse
              M.E.

          Super-shedding cattle and the transmission dynamics of Escherichia coli O157
          Epidemiology and Infection
          134
          2006
          131
          142
          16409660

              Maunula
              L.

              Kaupke
              A.

              Vasickova
              P.

              Soderberg
              K.

              Kozyra
              I.

              Lazic
              S.

              van der Poel
              W.H.

              Bouwknegt
              M.

              Rutjes
              S.

              Willems
              K.A.

              Moloney
              R.

              D&#x2019;Agostino
              M.

              de Roda Husman
              A.M.

              von Bonsdorff
              C.H.

              Rzezutka
              A.

              Pavlik
              I.

              Petrovic
              T.

              Cook
              N.

          Tracing enteric viruses in the European berry fruit supply chain
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          167
          2013
          177
          185
          24135674

              McCarty
              C.L.

              Angelo
              K.

              Beer
              K.D.

              Cibulskas-White
              K.

              Quinn
              K.

              de Fijter
              S.

              Bokanyi
              R.

              St Germain
              E.

              Baransi
              K.

              Barlow
              K.

              Shafer
              G.

              Hanna
              L.

              Spindler
              K.

              Walz
              E.

              DiOrio
              M.

              Jackson
              B.R.

              Luquez
              C.

              Mahon
              B.E.

              Basler
              C.

              Curran
              K.

              Matanock
              A.

              Walsh
              K.

              Slifka
              K.J.

              Rao
              A.K.

          Large outbreak of botulism associated with a church potluck Meal&#x2013;Ohio, 2015
          MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
          64
          2015
          802
          803
          26225479

              McIntyre
              L.

              Wilcott
              L.

              Naus
              M.

          Listeriosis outbreaks in British Columbia, Canada, caused by soft ripened cheese contaminated from environmental sources
          Biomedical Research International
          2015
          2015
          131623

              Mead
              S.

              Poulter
              M.

              Uphill
              J.

              Beck
              J.

              Whitfield
              J.

              Webb
              T.E.

              Campbell
              T.

              Adamson
              G.

              Deriziotis
              P.

              Tabrizi
              S.J.

              Hummerich
              H.

              Verzilli
              C.

              Alpers
              M.P.

              Whittaker
              J.C.

              Collinge
              J.

          Genetic risk factors for variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: a genome-wide association study
          Lancet Neurology
          8
          2009
          57
          66
          19081515

              Mead
              S.

              Whitfield
              J.

              Poulter
              M.

              Shah
              P.

              Uphill
              J.

              Beck
              J.

              Campbell
              T.

              Al-Dujaily
              H.

              Hummerich
              H.

              Alpers
              M.P.

              Collinge
              J.

          Genetic susceptibility, evolution and the kuru epidemic. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
          Series B Biological Sciences
          363
          2008
          3741
          3746

              Meng
              X.J.

          Zoonotic and foodborne transmission of hepatitis E virus
          Seminars in Liver Disease
          33
          2013
          41
          49
          23564388

              Mintz
              E.D.

              Hudson-Wragg
              M.

              Mshar
              P.

              Cartter
              M.L.

              Hadler
              J.L.

          Foodborne giardiasis in a corporate office setting
          Journal of Infectious Diseases
          167
          1993
          250
          253
          8418177

              MMWR

          Outbreak of Escherichia coli O104:H4 infections associated with sprout consumption &#x2013; Europe and North America, May&#x2013;July 2011
          MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
          62
          2013
          1029
          1031
          24352067

              Moffatt
              C.R.

              Combs
              B.G.

              Mwanri
              L.

              Holland
              R.

              Delroy
              B.

              Cameron
              S.

              Givney
              R.C.

          An outbreak of Salmonella Typhimurium phage type 64 gastroenteritis linked to catered luncheons in Adelaide, South Australia, June 2005
          Communicable Diseases Intelligence Quaterly Report
          30
          2006
          443
          448

              Moore
              M.D.

              Goulter
              R.M.

              Jaykus
              L.A.

          Human norovirus as a foodborne pathogen: challenges and developments
          Annual Review of Food Science and Technology
          6
          2015
          411
          433

              Moshtaghi
              H.

              Garg
              S.R.

              Mandokhot
              U.V.

          Prevalence of Listeria in soil
          Indian Journal of Experimental Biology
          41
          2003
          1466
          1468
          15320505

              Muller
              L.

              Schultz
              A.C.

              Fonager
              J.

              Jensen
              T.

              Lisby
              M.

              Hindsdal
              K.

              Krusell
              L.

              Eshoj
              A.

              Moller
              L.T.

              Porsbo
              L.J.

              Bottiger
              B.E.

              Kuhn
              K.

              Engberg
              J.

              Ethelberg
              S.

          Separate norovirus outbreaks linked to one source of imported frozen raspberries by molecular analysis, Denmark, 2010&#x2013;2011
          Epidemiology and Infection
          143
          2015
          2299
          2307
          25530074

              Munns
              K.D.

              Selinger
              L.B.

              Stanford
              K.

              Guan
              L.

              Callaway
              T.R.

              McAllister
              T.A.

          Perspectives on super-shedding of Escherichia coli O157:H7 by cattle
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          12
          2015
          89
          103
          25514549

              Murrell
              K.D.

          Zoonotic foodborne parasites and their surveillance
          Revue Scietifique et Technique
          32
          2013
          559
          569

              Nathanson
              N.

              Wilesmith
              J.

              Griot
              C.

          Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE): causes and consequences of a common source epidemic
          American Journal of Epidemiology
          145
          1997
          959
          969
          9169904

              Naylor
              S.W.

              Low
              J.C.

              Besser
              T.E.

              Mahajan
              A.

              Gunn
              G.J.

              Pearce
              M.C.

              McKendrick
              I.J.

              Smith
              D.G.

              Gally
              D.L.

          Lymphoid follicle-dense mucosa at the terminal rectum is the principal site of colonization of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 in the bovine host
          Infection and Immunity
          71
          2003
          1505
          1512
          12595469

              Newsom
              S.W.

          Pioneers in infection control: John Snow, Henry Whitehead, the broad street pump, and the beginnings of geographical epidemiology
          The Journal of Hospital Infection
          64
          2006
          210
          216
          16891036

              Nichols
              G.L.

          Fly transmission of Campylobacter
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          11
          2005
          361
          364
          15757548

              Ogden
              I.D.

              Hepburn
              N.F.

              MacRae
              M.

              Strachan
              N.J.

              Fenlon
              D.R.

              Rusbridge
              S.M.

              Pennington
              T.H.

          Long-term survival of Escherichia coli O157 on pasture following an outbreak associated with sheep at a scout camp
          Letters in Applied Microbiology
          34
          2002
          100
          104
          11849503

              Ogden
              I.D.

              MacRae
              M.

              Strachan
              N.J.

          Is the prevalence and shedding concentrations of E. coli O157 in beef cattle in Scotland seasonal?
          FEMS Microbiology Letters
          233
          2004
          297
          300
          15063499

              Oliveira
              C.J.

              Carvalho
              L.F.

              Garcia
              T.B.

          Experimental airborne transmission of Salmonella Agona and Salmonella Typhimurium in weaned pigs
          Epidemiology and Infection
          134
          2006
          199
          209
          16409668

              Oliveira
              C.J.

              Garcia
              T.B.

              Carvalho
              L.F.

              Givisiez
              P.E.

          Nose-to-nose transmission of Salmonella Typhimurium between weaned pigs
          Veterinary Microbiology
          125
          2007
          355
          361
          17643873

              Oliveira
              M.

              Usall
              J.

              Vinas
              I.

              Solsona
              C.

              Abadias
              M.

          Transfer of Listeria innocua from contaminated compost and irrigation water to lettuce leaves
          Food Microbiology
          28
          2011
          590
          596
          21356469

              Oliver
              S.P.

              Jayarao
              B.M.

              Almeida
              R.A.

          Foodborne pathogens in milk and the dairy farm environment: food safety and public health implications
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          2
          2005
          115
          129
          15992306

              Olsen
              S.J.

              Hansen
              G.R.

              Bartlett
              L.

              Fitzgerald
              C.

              Sonder
              A.

              Manjrekar
              R.

              Riggs
              T.

              Kim
              J.

              Flahart
              R.

              Pezzino
              G.

              Swerdlow
              D.L.

          An outbreak of Campylobacter jejuni infections associated with food handler contamination: the use of pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
          Journal of Infectious Diseases
          183
          2001
          164
          167
          11078485

              Omisakin
              F.

              MacRae
              M.

              Ogden
              I.D.

              Strachan
              N.J.

          Concentration and prevalence of Escherichia coli O157 in cattle feces at slaughter
          Applied and Environmental Microbiologyl
          69
          2003
          2444
          2447

              Palmer
              M.S.

              Dryden
              A.J.

              Hughes
              J.T.

              Collinge
              J.

          Homozygous prion protein genotype predisposes to sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
          Nature
          352
          1991
          340
          342
          1677164

              Paneth
              N.

          Assessing the contributions of John Snow to epidemiology: 150 years after removal of the broad street pump handle
          Epidemiology
          15
          2004
          514
          516
          15308944

              Patwardhan
              B.

              Mutalik
              G.

              Tillu
              G.

          Chapter 3-concepts of health and disease
          Integrative Approaches for Health
          2015
          53
          78

              Paull
              S.H.

              Song
              S.

              McClure
              K.M.

              Sackett
              L.C.

              Kilpatrick
              A.M.

              Johnson
              P.T.

          From superspreaders to disease hotspots: linking transmission across hosts and space
          Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment
          10
          2012
          75
          82
          23482675

              Pava-Ripoll
              M.

              Pearson
              R.E.

              Miller
              A.K.

              Tall
              B.D.

              Keys
              C.E.

              Ziobro
              G.C.

          Ingested Salmonella enterica, Cronobacter sakazakii, Escherichia coli O157:H7, and Listeria monocytogenes: transmission dynamics from adult house flies to their eggs and first filial (F1) generation adults
          BMC Microbiology
          15
          2015
          150
          26228457

              Pava-Ripoll
              M.

              Pearson
              R.E.

              Miller
              A.K.

              Ziobro
              G.C.

          Prevalence and relative risk of Cronobacter spp., Salmonella spp., and Listeria monocytogenes associated with the body surfaces and guts of individual filth flies
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          78
          2012
          7891
          7902
          22941079

              Pava-Ripoll
              M.

              Pearson
              R.E.

              Miller
              A.K.

              Ziobro
              G.C.

          Detection of foodborne bacterial pathogens from individual filth flies
          Journal of Visualised Experiments
          2015
          e52372

              Peck
              M.W.

              Stringer
              S.C.

              Carter
              A.T.

          Clostridium botulinum in the post-genomic era
          Food Microbiology
          28
          2011
          183
          191
          21315972

              Peset
              J.L.

          Plagues and Diseases in History. International Encyclopedia of the Social &amp; Behavioral Sciences
          second ed.
          2015
          174
          179

              Pesquero
              M.A.

              Elias Filho
              J.

              Carneiro
              L.C.

              Feitosa
              S.B.

              Oliveira
              M.A.

              Quintana
              R.C.

          Ants in a hospital environment and its importance as vector of bacteria
          Neotropical Entomology
          37
          2008
          472
          477
          18813751

              Prince
              D.S.

              Astry
              C.

              Vonderfecht
              S.

              Jakab
              G.

              Shen
              F.M.

              Yolken
              R.H.

          Aerosol transmission of experimental rotavirus infection
          Pediatric Infectioous Disease
          5
          1986
          218
          222

              Proverbio
              M.R.

              Lamba
              M.

              Rossi
              A.

              Siani
              P.

          Early diagnosis and treatment in a child with foodborne botulism
          Anaerobe
          39
          2016
          189
          192
          26688278

              Prusiner
              S.B.

          Prions
          Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A
          95
          1998
          13363
          13383

              Rahal
              E.A.

              Kazzi
              N.

              Nassar
              F.J.

              Matar
              G.M.

          Escherichia coli O157:H7-Clinical aspects and novel treatment approaches
          Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
          2
          2012
          138
          23162800

              Ramasamy
              I.

          The risk of accidental transmission of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy: identification of emerging issues
          Public Health
          118
          2004
          409
          420
          15313594

              Ramsay
              M.A.

          John Snow, MD: anaesthetist to the Queen of England and pioneer epidemiologist
          Proceedings (Baylor University Medical Center)
          19
          2006
          24
          28
          16424928

              Reisen
              W.K.

              Carroll
              B.D.

              Takahashi
              R.

              Fang
              Y.

              Garcia
              S.

              Martinez
              V.M.

              Quiring
              R.

          Repeated West Nile virus epidemic transmission in kern county, California, 2004-2007
          Journal of Medical Entomology
          46
          2009
          139
          157
          19198528

              Riley
              L.W.

          Pandemic lineages of extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia coli
          Clinical Microbiology and Infection
          20
          2014
          380
          390
          24766445

              Robinson
              S.E.

              Brown
              P.E.

              Wright
              E.J.

              Hart
              C.A.

              French
              N.P.

          Quantifying within- and between-animal variation and uncertainty associated with counts of Escherichia coli O157 occurring in naturally infected cattle faeces
          Journal of the Royal Society, Interface
          6
          2009
          169
          177

              Rodrigue
              D.C.

              Mast
              E.E.

              Greene
              K.D.

              Davis
              J.P.

              Hutchinson
              M.A.

              Wells
              J.G.

              Barrett
              T.J.

              Griffin
              P.M.

          A university outbreak of Escherichia coli O157:H7 infections associated with roast beef and an unusually benign clinical course
          Journal of Infectious Diseases
          172
          1995
          1122
          1125
          7561194

              Rodriguez
              A.

              Autio
              W.R.

              McLandsborough
              L.A.

          Effects of inoculation level, material hydration, and stainless steel surface roughness on the transfer of listeria monocytogenes from inoculated bologna to stainless steel and high-density polyethylene
          Journal of Food Protection
          70
          2007
          1423
          1428
          17612072

              Rosef
              O.

              Kapperud
              G.

          House flies (Musca domestica) as possible vectors of Campylobacter fetus subsp. jejuni
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          45
          1983
          381
          383
          6830213

              Rossi
              E.M.

              Scapin
              D.

              Tondo
              E.C.

          Survival and transfer of microorganisms from kitchen sponges to surfaces of stainless steel and polyethylene
          Journal of Infection in Developing Countries
          7
          2013
          229
          234
          23493001

              Sattar
              S.A.

              Ijaz
              M.K.

              Johnson-Lussenburg
              C.M.

              Springthorpe
              V.S.

          Effect of relative humidity on the airborne survival of rotavirus SA11
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          47
          1984
          879
          881
          6326670

              Schlundt
              J.

              Toyofuku
              H.

              Jansen
              J.

              Herbst
              S.A.

          Emerging food-borne zoonoses
          Revue Scietifique et Technique
          23
          2004
          513
          533

              Schmid
              D.

              Schandl
              S.

              Pichler
              A.M.

              Kornschober
              C.

              Berghold
              C.

              Beranek
              A.

              Neubauer
              G.

              Neuhold-Wassermann
              M.

              Schwender
              W.

              Klauber
              A.

              Deutz
              A.

              Pless
              P.

              Allerberger
              F.

          Salmonella Enteritidis phage type 21 outbreak in Austria, 2005
          European Surveillance Bulletin
          11
          2006
          67
          69

              Schmidt
              J.W.

              Arthur
              T.M.

              Bosilevac
              J.M.

              Kalchayanand
              N.

              Wheeler
              T.L.

          Detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella enterica in air and droplets at three U.S. commercial beef processing plants
          Journal of Food Protection
          75
          2012
          2213
          2218
          23212019

              Schoder
              D.

              Melzner
              D.

              Schmalwieser
              A.

              Zangana
              A.

              Winter
              P.

              Wagner
              M.

          Important vectors for Listeria monocytogenes transmission at farm dairies manufacturing fresh sheep and goat cheese from raw milk
          Journal of Food Protection
          74
          2011
          919
          924
          21669068

              Sharps
              C.P.

              Kotwal
              G.

              Cannon
              J.L.

          Human norovirus transfer to stainless steel and small fruits during handling
          Journal of Food Protection
          75
          2012
          1437
          1446
          22856567

              Sheen
              S.

          Modeling surface transfer of Listeria monocytogenes on salami during slicing
          Journal of Food Science
          73
          2008
          E304
          E311
          19241551

              Sheth
              A.N.

              Wiersma
              P.

              Atrubin
              D.

              Dubey
              V.

              Zink
              D.

              Skinner
              G.

              Doerr
              F.

              Juliao
              P.

              Gonzalez
              G.

              Burnett
              C.

              Drenzek
              C.

              Shuler
              C.

              Austin
              J.

              Ellis
              A.

              Maslanka
              S.

              Sobel
              J.

          International outbreak of severe botulism with prolonged toxemia caused by commercial carrot juice
          Clinical Infectious Diseases
          47
          2008
          1245
          1251
          18834318

              Shiode
              N.

              Shiode
              S.

              Rod-Thatcher
              E.

              Rana
              S.

              Vinten-Johansen
              P.

          The mortality rates and the space-time patterns of John Snow&#x2019;s cholera epidemic map
          International Journal of Health Geography
          14
          2015
          21

              Sobel
              J.

          Botulism
          Clinical Infectious Diseases
          41
          2005
          1167
          1173
          16163636

              Sobel
              J.

              Tucker
              N.

              Sulka
              A.

              McLaughlin
              J.

              Maslanka
              S.

          Foodborne botulism in the United States, 1990&#x2013;2000
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          10
          2004
          1606
          1611
          15498163

              Soderstrom
              A.

              Osterberg
              P.

              Lindqvist
              A.

              Jonsson
              B.

              Lindberg
              A.

              Blide Ulander
              S.

              Welinder-Olsson
              C.

              Lofdahl
              S.

              Kaijser
              B.

              De Jong
              B.

              Kuhlmann-Berenzon
              S.

              Boqvist
              S.

              Eriksson
              E.

              Szanto
              E.

              Andersson
              S.

              Allestam
              G.

              Hedenstrom
              I.

              Ledet Muller
              L.

              Andersson
              Y.

          A large Escherichia coli O157 outbreak in Sweden associated with locally produced lettuce
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          5
          2008
          339
          349
          18767979

              Solano
              R.

              Alseda
              M.

              Godoy
              P.

              Sanz
              M.

              Bartolome
              R.

              Manzanares-Laya
              S.

              Dominguez
              A.

              Cayla
              J.A.

          Person-to-person transmission of norovirus resulting in an outbreak of acute gastroenteritis at a summer camp
          European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology
          26
          2014
          1160
          1166
          25117826

              Solomon
              E.B.

              Yaron
              S.

              Matthews
              K.R.

          Transmission of Escherichia coli O157:H7 from contaminated manure and irrigation water to lettuce plant tissue and its subsequent internalization
          Applied and Environmental Microbiology
          68
          2002
          397
          400
          11772650

              Soon
              J.M.

              Chadd
              S.A.

              Baines
              R.N.

          Escherichia coli O157:H7 in beef cattle: on farm contamination and pre-slaughter control methods
          Animal Health Research Reviews
          12
          2011
          197
          211
          22152293

              Spurlock
              A.T.

              Zottola
              E.A.

          The survival of Listeria monocytogenes in aerosols
          Journal of Food Protection
          54
          1991
          910
          912
          31071829

              Steele
              M.

              Odumeru
              J.

          Irrigation water as source of foodborne pathogens on fruit and vegetables
          Journal of Food Protection
          67
          2004
          2839
          2849
          15633699

              Stein
              R.A.

          Super-spreaders in infectious diseases
          International Journal of Infectious Diseases
          15
          2011
          e510
          513
          21737332

              Stevens
              M.P.

              Humphrey
              T.J.

              Maskell
              D.J.

          Molecular insights into farm animal and zoonotic Salmonella infections
          Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B Biological Sciences
          364
          2009
          2709
          2723
          19687040

              Su
              C.

              Brandt
              L.J.

          Escherichia coli O157:H7 infection in humans
          Annals of Internal Medicine
          123
          1995
          698
          714
          7574226

              Synge
              B.A.

              Chase-Topping
              M.E.

              Hopkins
              G.F.

              McKendrick
              I.J.

              Thomson-Carter
              F.

              Gray
              D.

              Rusbridge
              S.M.

              Munro
              F.I.

              Foster
              G.

              Gunn
              G.J.

          Factors influencing the shedding of verocytotoxin-producing Escherichia coli O157 by beef suckler cows
          Epidemiology and Infection
          130
          2003
          301
          312
          12729199

              Tanzi
              M.G.

              Gabay
              M.P.

          Association between honey consumption and infant botulism
          Pharmacotherapy
          22
          2002
          1479
          1483
          12432974

              Taylor
              D.M.

          Inactivation of prions by physical and chemical means
          The Journal of Hospital Infection
          43
          Suppl.
          1999
          S69
          S76
          10658760

              Taylor
              D.M.

              Woodgate
              S.L.

          Rendering practices and inactivation of transmissible spongiform encephalopathy agents
          Revue Scietifique et Technique
          22
          2003
          297
          310

              Teunis
              P.F.

              Moe
              C.L.

              Liu
              P.

              Miller
              S.E.

              Lindesmith
              L.

              Baric
              R.S.

              Le Pendu
              J.

              Calderon
              R.L.

          Norwalk virus: how infectious is it?
          Journal of Medical Virology
          80
          2008
          1468
          1476
          18551613

              Thornley
              C.N.

              Emslie
              N.A.

              Sprott
              T.W.

              Greening
              G.E.

              Rapana
              J.P.

          Recurring norovirus transmission on an airplane
          Clinical Infectious Diseases
          53
          2011
          515
          520
          21836128

              Todd
              E.C.

              Greig
              J.D.

              Bartleson
              C.A.

              Michaels
              B.S.

          Outbreaks where food workers have been implicated in the spread of foodborne disease. Part 3. Factors contributing to outbreaks and description of outbreak categories
          Journal of Food Protection
          70
          2007
          2199
          2217
          17900100

              Todd
              E.C.

              Greig
              J.D.

              Bartleson
              C.A.

              Michaels
              B.S.

          Outbreaks where food workers have been implicated in the spread of foodborne disease. Part 6. Transmission and survival of pathogens in the food processing and preparation environment
          Journal of Food Protection
          72
          2009
          202
          219
          19205488

              Tulodziecki
              D.

          A case study in explanatory power: John Snow&#x2019;s conclusions about the pathology and transmission of cholera
          Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
          42
          2011
          306
          316
          21802635

              Tung-Thompson
              G.

              Libera
              D.A.

              Koch
              K.L.

              de Los Reyes
              F.L.
              3rd

              Jaykus
              L.A.

          Aerosolization of a human norovirus surrogate, bacteriophage MS2, during simulated vomiting
          PLoS One
          10
          2015
          e0134277
          26287612

              Vally
              H.

              Glass
              K.

              Ford
              L.

              Hall
              G.

              Kirk
              M.D.

              Shadbolt
              C.

              Veitch
              M.

              Fullerton
              K.E.

              Musto
              J.

              Becker
              N.

          Proportion of illness acquired by foodborne transmission for nine enteric pathogens in Australia: an expert elicitation
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          11
          2014
          727
          733
          25072416

              Van Kessel
              J.A.

              Karns
              J.S.

              Lombard
              J.E.

              Kopral
              C.A.

          Prevalence of Salmonella enterica, Listeria monocytogenes, and Escherichia coli virulence factors in bulk tank milk and in-line filters from U.S. dairies
          Journal of Food Protection
          74
          2011
          759
          768
          21549046

              Van Renterghem
              B.

              Huysman
              F.

              Rygole
              R.

              Verstraete
              W.

          Detection and prevalence of Listeria monocytogenes in the agricultural ecosystem
          Journal of Applied Bacteriology
          71
          1991
          211
          217
          1955415

              Vega
              E.

              Barclay
              L.

              Gregoricus
              N.

              Shirley
              S.H.

              Lee
              D.

              Vinje
              J.

          Genotypic and epidemiologic trends of norovirus outbreaks in the United States, 2009 to 2013
          Journal of Clinical Microbiology
          52
          2014
          147
          155
          24172151

              Vega
              E.

              Barclay
              L.

              Gregoricus
              N.

              Williams
              K.

              Lee
              D.

              Vinje
              J.

          Novel surveillance network for norovirus gastroenteritis outbreaks, United States
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          17
          2011
          1389
          1395
          21801614

              Verhaelen
              K.

              Bouwknegt
              M.

              Carratala
              A.

              Lodder-Verschoor
              F.

              Diez-Valcarce
              M.

              Rodriguez-Lazaro
              D.

              de Roda Husman
              A.M.

              Rutjes
              S.A.

          Virus transfer proportions between gloved fingertips, soft berries, and lettuce, and associated health risks
          International Journal of Food Microbiology
          166
          2013
          419
          425
          24029026

              Vivant
              A.L.

              Garmyn
              D.

              Piveteau
              P.

          Listeria monocytogenes, a down-to-earth pathogen
          Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology
          3
          2013
          87
          24350062

              Vogt
              R.L.

              Dippold
              L.

          Escherichia coli O157:H7 outbreak associated with consumption of ground beef, June&#x2013;July 2002
          Public Health Rep
          120
          2005
          174
          178
          15842119

              Volkova
              V.V.

              Howey
              R.

              Savill
              N.J.

              Woolhouse
              M.E.

          Sheep movement networks and the transmission of infectious diseases
          PLoS One
          5
          2010
          e11185
          20567504

              Vorst
              K.L.

              Todd
              E.C.

              Rysert
              E.T.

          Transfer of Listeria monocytogenes during mechanical slicing of Turkey breast, bologna, and salami
          Journal of Food Protection
          69
          2006
          619
          626
          16541694

              Vriesekoop
              F.

              Russell
              C.

              Alvarez-Mayorga
              B.

              Aidoo
              K.

              Yuan
              Q.

              Scannell
              A.

              Beumer
              R.R.

              Jiang
              X.

              Barro
              N.

              Otokunefor
              K.

              Smith-Arnold
              C.

              Heap
              A.

              Chen
              J.

              Iturriage
              M.H.

              Hazeleger
              W.

              DeSlandes
              J.

              Kinley
              B.

              Wilson
              K.

              Menz
              G.

          Dirty money: an investigation into the hygiene status of some of the world&#x2019;s currencies as obtained from food outlets
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          7
          2010
          1497
          1502
          20704502

              Vriesekoop
              F.

              Shaw
              R.

          The Australian bush fly (Musca vetustissima) as a potential vector in the transmission of foodborne pathogens at outdoor eateries
          Foodborne Pathogens and Disease
          7
          2010
          275
          279
          19895260

              Vugia
              D.J.

              Mase
              S.R.

              Cole
              B.

              Stiles
              J.

              Rosenberg
              J.

              Velasquez
              L.

              Radner
              A.

              Inami
              G.

          Botulism from drinking pruno
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          15
          2009
          69
          71
          19116055

              Wagner
              E.G.

              Lanoix
              J.N.

          Excreta Disposal for Rural Areas and Small Communities
          WHO Monograph series No 39
          1958
          WHO
          Geneva

              Walters
              M.S.

              Sreenivasan
              N.

              Person
              B.

              Shew
              M.

              Wheeler
              D.

              Hall
              J.

              Bogdanow
              L.

              Leniek
              K.

              Rao
              A.

          A qualitative Inquiry about pruno, an illicit alcoholic beverage linked to botulism outbreaks in United States prisons
          American Journal of Public Health
          105
          2015
          2256
          2261
          26378846

              Wang
              Y.C.

              Chang
              Y.C.

              Chuang
              H.L.

              Chiu
              C.C.

              Yeh
              K.S.

              Chang
              C.C.

              Hsuan
              S.L.

              Lin
              W.H.

              Chen
              T.H.

          Transmission of Salmonella between swine farms by the housefly (Musca domestica)
          Journal of Food Protection
          74
          2011
          1012
          1016
          21669083

              Wendel
              A.M.

              Johnson
              D.H.

              Sharapov
              U.

              Grant
              J.

              Archer
              J.R.

              Monson
              T.

              Koschmann
              C.

              Davis
              J.P.

          Multistate outbreak of Escherichia coli O157:H7 infection associated with consumption of packaged spinach, August&#x2013;September 2006: the Wisconsin investigation
          Clinical Infectious Diseases
          48
          2009
          1079
          1086
          19265476

              Widdowson
              M.A.

              Sulka
              A.

              Bulens
              S.N.

              Beard
              R.S.

              Chaves
              S.S.

              Hammond
              R.

              Salehi
              E.D.

              Swanson
              E.

              Totaro
              J.

              Woron
              R.

              Mead
              P.S.

              Bresee
              J.S.

              Monroe
              S.S.

              Glass
              R.I.

          Norovirus and foodborne disease, United States, 1991&#x2013;2000
          Emerging Infectious Diseases
          11
          2005
          95
          102
          15705329

              Williams
              K.J.

              Ward
              M.P.

              Dhungyel
              O.P.

              Hall
              E.J.

          Risk factors for Escherichia coli O157 shedding and super-shedding by dairy heifers at pasture
          Epidemiology and Infection
          2014
          1
          12

              Woolhouse
              M.E.

              Coen
              P.

              Matthews
              L.

              Foster
              J.D.

              Elsen
              J.M.

              Lewis
              R.M.

              Haydon
              D.T.

              Hunter
              N.

          A centuries-long epidemic of scrapie in British sheep?
          Trends in Microbiology
          9
          2001
          67
          70
          11173245

              Wu
              H.W.

              Ito
              A.

              Ai
              L.

              Zhou
              X.N.

              Acosta
              L.P.

              Lee Willingham Iii
              A.

          Cysticercosis/taeniasis endemicity in Southeast Asia: current status and control measures
          Acta Tropica
          2016
          pii: S0001-706X(16)30013-4. (Epub ahead of print)

              Yoo
              J.R.

              Heo
              S.T.

              Lee
              K.H.

              Kim
              Y.R.

              Yoo
              S.J.

          Foodborne outbreak of human brucellosis caused by ingested raw materials of fetal calf on Jeju Island
          The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
          92
          2015
          267
          269
          25510725

</pmc-articles