LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10112783327020Expert Opin Ther TargetsExpert Opin. Ther. TargetsExpert opinion on therapeutic targets1472-82221744-763125913180482254010.1517/14728222.2015.1039513NIHMS773274ArticleSertoli cells are the target of environmental toxicants in the testis – a mechanistic and therapeutic insight Gao Ying Mruk Dolores D Cheng C Yan †Population Council, Center for Biomedical Research, New York, NY, USA† Author for correspondence, Population Council, Center for Biomedical Research, 1230 York Ave, New York, NY, 10065, USA, ccheng@mail.rockefeller.edu31 3 2016 26 4 2015 2015 06 4 2016 19 8 1073 1090 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Introduction
Sertoli cells support germ cell development in the testis via an elaborate network of cell junctions that confers structural, communicating, and signaling support. However, Sertoli cell junctions and cytoskeletons are the target of environmental toxicants. Because germ cells rely on Sertoli cells for the provision of structural/functional/nutritional support, exposure of males to toxicants leads to germ cell exfoliation due to Sertoli cell injuries. Interestingly, the molecular mechanism(s) by which toxicants induce cytoskeletal disruption that leads to germ cell exfoliation is unclear, until recent years, which are discussed herein. This information can possibly be used to therapeutically manage toxicant-induced infertility/subfertility in human males.

Areas covered
In this review, we provide a brief update on the use of Sertoli cell system developed for rodents and humans in vitro, which can be deployed in any research laboratory with minimal upfront setup costs. These systems can be used to collect reliable data applicable to studies in vivo. We also discuss the latest findings on the mechanisms by which toxicants induce Sertoli cell injury, in particular cytoskeletal disruption. We also identify candidate molecules that are likely targets of toxicants.

Expert opinion
We provide two hypothetical models delineating the mechanism by which toxicants induce germ cell exfoliation and blood–testis barrier disruption. We also discuss molecules that are the targets of toxicants as therapeutic candidates.

environmental toxicantSertoli cellsspermatogenesistestis
   1. Introduction
About 15% of couples are infertile, and almost 50% of these cases are contributed by men [1]. In fact, infertility is an emerging global public health issue after cancer and cardiovascular diseases, thus illustrating the necessity of identifying the causes of male infertility. Although there are reports demonstrating a trend of rising male infertility and subfertility in recent decades since the 1980s based on analysis of semen quality, such as reducing sperm counts in various countries [2,3], including a rise of testicular cancer [4], others failed to confirm these observations since there are regional variations [5,6]. Recent studies, however, have generally confirmed that the trend of reducing male fertility based on sperm counts and semen analyses is likely the result of an increase in exposure of men to environmental toxicants – an emerging determining key factor that links reduced sperm counts and infertility [7,8]. However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which environmental toxicants induce male reproductive dysfunction remain unknown. As such, therapeutic steps that can be taken to reverse the reduced semen quality such as declining sperm counts and/or sperm motility in men are not available. Recent advances in genomics, proteomics and metabolomics have identified a number of biomarkers that can be used to study the etiology of toxicant-mediated male infertility, which include cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator, clusterin, protamine-2, androgen receptor (AR), A-kinase anchor protein 4, sperm-associated antigen 1B and others [9], thus illustrating that genetic defects can contribute to male infertility. Nonetheless, these defects could also be caused by environmental toxicants since many of these toxicants (e.g., cadmium, perfluorooctane sulfonate [PFOS]) are known carcinogens [10-12]. For instance, studies have shown that one of the effects by which cadmium induces carcinogenesis is mediated by mutagenesis [10]. Also, oxidative stress induced by toxicants is an emerging mechanism that disrupts male fertility [13,14]. Additionally, microtubule (MT)-based cytoskeleton in the testis is an emerging target of toxicants [15,16]. Collectively, these findings illustrate that environmental toxicant-induced male reproductive dysfunction can be better managed if the target(s) and/or candidate molecule(s) in the testis can be identified and better investigated. In this context, it is of interest to note that Sertoli cells, in particular Sertoli cell–cell and Sertoli–germ cell junctions and the associated underlying actin-based cytoskeleton, have recently been identified as one of the primarily targets of toxicants including human Sertoli cells [17]. Because the Sertoli cell is the only somatic cell type in the seminiferous epithelium that supports spermatogenesis, these findings coupled with earlier studies reporting that Sertoli cell MT-based cytoskeleton is the target of toxicants [15,16] thus provide a likely roadmap to tackle toxicant-induced male reproductive dysfunction.

Many environmental toxicants are natural or synthetic compounds that are extensively used in the industry, many of them have already been integrated into our food chain, yet they are known to disrupt normal function of the testis in particular following acute exposure or during fetal development in rodents and possibly humans [18,19]. These compounds include bisphenol A (BPA), cadmium, polychlorinated biphenyls, pesticides, phthalates, PFOS and others. Although we have reviewed the role of environmental toxicants on male reproductive dysfunction [18,20], the molecular mechanism(s) by which environmental toxicants perturb Sertoli cell function, in particular how toxicants perturb Sertoli cell–cell and Sertoli–spermatid cell junctions have not been critically evaluated based on recent findings in particular the use of human Sertoli cells. Moreover, studies have shown that the Sertoli cell culture system in vitro, in particular human Sertoli cells, can be a novel model to study the molecular mechanism by which toxicants induce male reproductive dysfunction. Thus, we critically evaluate these findings and propose two models which serve as the framework for future investigations.

2. In vitro models to study environmental toxicant-induced testicular damage
One of the major obstacles to identify the target(s) of environmental toxicants such as endocrine disrupting chemicals in the testis is the lack of a suitable in vitro model which can reliably translate findings from in vitro to in vivo. In the 1980s, several laboratories reported that Sertoli cells cultured in vitro in serum-free chemically defined medium can serve as a reliable model to study blood–testis barrier (BTB) function [21,22]. Subsequent studies have shown that this model mimics the Sertoli cell BTB in vivo both functionally and structurally since ultrastructures of tight junction (TJ), basal ectoplasmic specialization (basal ES), gap junction (GJ) and desmosome are found in these cultures besides the presence of a TJ-permeability barrier [23,24]. As such, multiple investigators have used this system for studies in their laboratories to better understand the biology of BTB, and many of these earlier findings have also been reproduced in vivo, illustrating the physiological relevancy of this in vitro model [23]. Because the BTB confers a major obstacle for the access of environmental toxicants to the testis, this model thus represents a major breakthrough to understand the biology of toxicant-induced testicular dysfunction, in particular how toxicants get access to the adluminal compartment to perturb germ cell function including meiosis and subsequent differentiation of haploid spermatids into spermatozoa. It is now established that Sertoli cells isolated from 20-day-old rat testes are capable of assembling a functional TJ-permeability barrier with ultrastructures of TJ, basal ES, GJ and desmosome in ~ 2 – 3 days in serum-free F12/DMEM with nutritional supplements, and Sertoli cell BTB function can be reliably monitored by assessing the transepithelial electrical resistance across the cell epithelium when Sertoli cells are cultured on Matrigel®-coated bicameral culture chambers/units [24]. Interestingly, these Sertoli cells can be obtained in high yield from 20-day-old male pups with a purity of ~ 98%; they are differentiated and cease to divide, mimicking adult Sertoli cells functionally, and contaminated with negligible Leydig, peritubular myoid and germ cells [24] versus Sertoli cells isolated from adult rodent testes with a maximal purity of ~ 85% [25]. Additionally, Sertoli cells can be cultured on Matrigel-coated coverslips, so that changes in localization and/or distribution of integral membrane proteins and associated peripheral adaptors at the Sertoli cell–cell interface as well as actin- and/or MT-based cytoskeletons can be assessed in parallel experiments. If needed, Sertoli cells can also be cultured in 12- or 24-well culture dishes, so that lysates can be obtained from these cells to assess changes in the steady-state levels of proteins and/or mRNAs by immunoblotting or reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction/quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Besides, additional biochemical assays can be performed to monitor changes in the bundling activity, as well as polymerization, and depolymerization kinetics of actin microfilaments and/or microtubules. These findings can then be used to validate and expand other morphological findings. If a target gene (or protein) or a set of relevant genes (or proteins) are known to be involved in mediating a toxicant-induced phenotype (e.g., a disruption or a tightening of the TJ barrier function), a downstream/common signaling molecule can be knocked down by RNA interference (RNAi) to confirm the finding before pertinent in vivo studies are conducted. Using such an approach, some advances are made in recent years, which are critically evaluated below. Furthermore, it is known that testes from rodents and humans can respond differently to the same EDC [26]; also, some TJ proteins, such as occludin, are only found in rodent but not human testes [17,27], whereas others, such as claudin-3, are found in humans but not rat testes [28]. Thus, it is important to perform studies using human Sertoli cells instead of extrapolating data from studies in rodents to generalize the molecular mechanism(s) of a toxicant in the testis. An important development in recent years is the initial observation that Sertoli cells, both in rodents and humans, when cultured in serum-containing medium in vitro remain mitotically active [17,29,30]. Furthermore, these cells can be cryopreserved and stored in liquid nitrogen for years and remain viable for subcultures [17,30]. Typical ultrastructures of Sertoli cells (e.g., lipid droplets) and Sertoli cell-specific markers (e.g., GATA-4 and SOX9) are also detected in these cells [30]. When cultured in F12/DMEM containing fetal bovine serum (FBS, 5% vol/vol), penicillin (100 units/ml) and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) at 35°C in a humidified environment with 95% air/5% CO2, the doubling time of human Sertoli cells is routinely ~ 4 days [17,30]. Furthermore, a functional TJ-permeability barrier is established when human Sertoli cells are cultured on human fibronectin-coated bicameral inserts [17,30], analogous to rat primary Sertoli cells. Thus, human Sertoli cells derived from a single individual can be used for multiple analyses without opting to obtain fresh human testes for their isolation, making it possible for a detailed and careful analysis of environmental toxicant-induced Sertoli cell injury using human Sertoli cells from a small group of men as illustrated in a recent report [17]. As such, this system provides a valuable tool in studies to investigate environmental toxicant-induced Sertoli cell injury such as the BTB function. However, it is noted that the metabolism of toxicants in vitro can be different from in vivo. Thus, other methods, such as in vivo animal models, and high-throughput genomics and proteomics, may be necessary to combine with this in vitro system to provide the mechanistic insights on toxicant-mediated male reproductive dysfunction.

3. Mechanisms of environmental toxicant-induced testicular damage
3.1 Bisphenol A
3.1.1 Introduction
BPA (2, 2-bis [4-hydroxyphenyl] propane) is an environmental toxicant widely used for manufacturing of polyesterstyrene, epoxy and polycarbonate resins, which are used for the production of household items such as water and baby bottles, food and beverage containers to confer their flexibility and durability. BPA is also present in dental fillings and sealants, thermal paper receipts and others. BPA is a reproductive toxicant, in particular, following in utero exposure and also in fetal/neonatal rodents and perhaps humans [31,32]. Human exposure to BPA is mainly through contaminated food and water, but BPA can also leach out of plastic or polycarbonate containers and bottles, especially under elevated temperature [33]. The estimated human daily intake of BPA is 34 ng/kg b.w. [19]. BPA is an EDC that exerts its effect by binding to estrogen receptors, ARs and/or thyroid hormone receptors [34]. Because these steroid receptors are found in Sertoli cells [35,36], BPA can exert its effects via these receptors to impair Sertoli cell function. Emerging epidemiological and experimental evidence indicates that BPA has adverse effects on male reproductive function following in utero and fetal/neonatal exposure because adults are more tolerant to BPA [37-39], perhaps due to its short half-life, &lt; 2 h [39]. For instance, treatment of adult rats with BPA at 0.02 – 50 mg/kg b.w. by oral gavage does not impair spermatogenesis; however, it disrupts BTB integrity when neonatal rats at 20 dpp are exposed to acute doses of BPA (50 mg/kg b.w./day for 6 doses) or when Sertoli cells isolated from rats are exposed to BPA at 40 – 200 μM [37]. Administration of BPA to pubescent versus adult mice induces degenerative changes in the seminiferous epithelium, leading to reduced sperm counts (but not in adult mice) by maturation, and this disruptive effect of BPA in immature mice can be further potentiated by X-ray exposure [40].

3.1.2 BPA perturbs Sertoli cell function via MAPK signaling pathway
In mammals, MAPK pathways are composed of three independent signaling cascades mediated by either extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK) or p38. Fetal exposure of rats to BPA was shown to activate Raf1, p-ERK1 in the testis, and in situ hybridization analysis confirmed a BPA-induced upregulation on the expression of Raf1 and ERK1/2 mostly in Sertoli cells [41]. Consistent with this finding, BPA was also reported to upregulate p-ERK expression in Sertoli cells during BPA-mediated Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier disruption [37]. Subsequent study has shown that BPA-induced pERK1/2 activation quickly returned to its basal level following BPA removal in Sertoli cell cultures with an established functional TJ barrier, illustrating that BPA-induced Sertoli cell TJ barrier disruption is likely mediated via the ERK pathway [42]. Also, PD98059, a selective inhibitor of ERK, was shown to repress the BPA-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation/activation in Sertoli cells [43]. BPA is also found to induce downregulation and redistribution of junction proteins, such as occludin, zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1), N-cadherin, β-catenin or connexin 43 (Cx43) at the cell–cell interface using Sertoli cells isolated from rat testes [37] or human testes [17] with an established TJ barrier that mimics the Sertoli cell BTB in vivo. It remains to be determined if these BPA-induced changes in cell junction protein expression and/or distribution/localization can be blocked or reversed by using specific inhibitors or antagonists of ERK1/2. Nonetheless, these data indicate that BPA exerts its disruptive effects on the Sertoli cell TJ barrier via ERK, at least in part, involving downregulation on the expression and/or localization of integral membrane proteins and their peripheral adaptors at the cell–cell interface.

3.1.3 BPA perturbs Sertoli cell GJ communication
GJs are intercellular communication channels between adjacent cells in an epithelium, such as the seminiferous epithelium, so that chemical and/or biological signaling molecules (usually &lt; 1 kDa) can be transported between adjacent cells (e.g., Sertoli–Sertoli, Sertoli–germ or germ–germ cells), which are necessary to coordinate cellular events of the epithelium in response to changes in the environment or intrinsic/extrinsic biological stimuli [44,45]. In the testis, Cx43 is the predominant GJ protein. BPA was found to downregulate the expression of Cx43 and its phosphorylation isoform p-Cx43-Ser368 in Sertoli cells, causing redistribution of Cx43 from Sertoli cell–cell interface by moving into cell cytosol via endocytosis (Table 1) [37,42]. Cx43 is known to have 19 phosphorylation sites, which can be phosphorylated by MAPK, c-Src, PKC or Akt (also known as PKB), and these kinases act on different phosphorylation sites to regulate GJ pore size, assembly and turnover, thereby modulating Cx43-based GJ function [46]. For instance, phosphorylation of Cx43 at Ser373 by Akt was found to eliminate the interactions of Cx43 with ZO-1, causing enlargement of GJ pore size [47,48]. PKC was shown to phosphorylate Cx43 at Ser368, contributing to a disruption of Cx43-based intercellular communications [49]. Using a functional GJ assay based on the fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), BPA was found to impede intercellular communications between Sertoli cells [42]. A study using molecular modeling analysis also revealed the presence of a putative docking domain in Cx26 that can structurally interact with BPA [18]. Collectively, these findings support the notion that GJ in Sertoli cells is likely one of the targets of BPA in the testis. Studies have shown that Cx43 interacts with desmosomal adaptor protein plakophilin-2 to create a functional protein complex, and this complex is necessary to coordinate other junction types at the BTB, such as TJ, basal ES, GJ and desmosome, to maintain the BTB integrity [50]. This notion is supported by findings that a knockdown of both Cx43 and plakophilin-2 by RNAi, but not either protein alone, induced Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier disruption, illustrating that a disruption of GJ function can perturb Sertoli cell TJ barrier integrity. Thus, when BPA disrupts Sertoli cell GJ communication at the BTB, this in turn perturbs coordination of various junction types at the BTB to maintain its integrity, effectively inducing BTB breakdown, making the testis more susceptible to toxicants.

3.1.4 BPA induces Sertoli and germ cell apoptosis
Studies have shown that BPA induces cytotoxicity in Sertoli cells causing apoptosis in Sertoli cells cultured in vitro [51]. The BPA-induced apoptosis in Sertoli cells is likely mediated via the phosphatase and tensin homolog (Pten)/Akt, JNK/p38 MAPK, NF-κB and/or Fas/FasL signaling molecules downstream [52,53]. CaM-CaMKII-ERK [Calmodulin (CaM) and Ca2+/CaM-dependent protein kinase II-ERK] pathway was also shown to play a role in BPA-induced apoptosis in TM4 cells (a mouse Sertoli cell line) (Figure 1) [54]. BPA was also found to induce aggregation of actin filaments in Sertoli cells [51], suggesting that BPA may target cytoskeleton that leads to Sertoli cell apoptosis (Figure 1). In this context, it is of interest to note that BPA also induces germ cell apoptosis via p38 MAPK pathway and the transmembrane metalloprotease A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease-17 (Figure 1) [55]. It is likely that p38 MAPK is the common signaling molecule that mediates the BPA-induced Sertoli and germ cell apoptosis. It is also possible that there are crosstalks between MAPK and other signaling molecules shown in Figure 1 during BPA-induced Sertoli and germ cell apoptosis. Needless to say, further studies are needed to delineate the cascade of events by which these signaling molecules mediate BPA-induced Sertoli and/or germ cell apoptosis and if p38 MAPK is the key player in these events.

3.1.5 BPA perturbs human Sertoli cell actin cytoskeleton
When human Sertoli cells cultured in vitro are exposed to BPA, the organization of F-actin network is affected, and the extent of damage is dose-dependent [17]. For instance, at 0.4 μM, BPA was found to cause truncation of actin microfilaments in Sertoli cells, but at higher concentrations, such as 40 and 200 μM, BPA caused retraction and defragmentation of actin microfilaments, in which the truncated microfilaments retracted from cell cytosol and localized closely to the Sertoli cell nucleus [17]. These changes apparently are the result of mislocalization of two actin regulatory proteins, namely branched actin nucleation-inducing protein Arp3 and actin barbed end capping and bundling protein Eps8, so that actin microfilaments fail to properly organize into a bundled network to support Sertoli cell BTB function [17]. These findings should now be expanded to investigate if these BPA-induced cytoskeletal disruptions in human Sertoli cells are mediated by p-focal adhesion kinase [FAK]-Tyr397 or p-FAK-Tyr407, as noted in the rat testis [56].

3.1.6 Summary
i) BPA disrupts Sertoli cell TJ barrier via the ERK pathway; ii) BPA also downregulates the expression and perturbs localization of GJ protein Cx43 and GJ communication at the BTB; iii) BPA induces Sertoli and germ cell apoptosis via different signaling pathways; and iv) BPA perturbs Sertoli cell actin cytoskeleton mediated by a disruption of spatiotemporal expression and/or localization of Arp3 and Eps8 in human Sertoli cells.

3.2 Cadmium
3.2.1 Introduction
Cadmium is a heavy metal and an EDC that is known to cause male reproductive toxicity in humans and rodents [19,20]. Cadmium-emitting industries including metal mining and refining, fertilizer production, waste incineration, fossil fuel combustion and battery manufacturing, which thus release cadmium to the atmosphere, water and soil, thereby entering the food chain [57]. Cigarette smoking is also another source of cadmium for humans [57]. The estimated human daily intake of cadmium is 1.06 μg/kg b.w. [19]. However, due to the long half-life of cadmium, ~ 20 – 40 years in humans, significant amount of cadmium can be accumulated in the body. The testis is highly sensitive to cadmium toxicity [58], and cadmium was found to induce severe testicular injury in adult rats in the 1950s [59]. The BTB is the primary target of cadmium and BTB disruption takes place sooner than micro-vessel disruption following an acute dose of cadmium in rodents [60]. CdCl2 induces BTB disruption by causing defragmentation of actin filaments (and also TJ fibrils) in Sertoli cells [60,61] including human Sertoli cells [17], suggesting that cytoskeleton may also be a target of cadmium toxicity in the testis.

3.2.2 Cadmium perturbs Sertoli cell BTB function via MAPK signaling pathway
TGF-β3 is known to perturb the Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier in vitro, mediated by an activation of p38 MAPK downstream, leading to a downregulation of TJ integral membrane protein occludin, thereby destabilizing the TJ barrier [62]. The involvement of p38 MAPK in TGF-β3-induced Sertoli TJ barrier disruption has been confirmed in studies using specific inhibitors since SB202190 (a specific p38 MAPK inhibitor), but not U0126 (a specific MEK1/2 kinase inhibitor), effectively blocks TGF-β3 mediated TJ barrier disruption [62]. Subsequent studies have shown that cadmium also exerts its disruptive effects on the BTB in the rat testis in vivo by an initial upregulation of TGF-β3, to be followed by an activation of p38 MAPK, and this cadmium-mediated toxicity effect can be blocked by SB202190 [63,64]. Additionally, CdCl2 also activates JNK pathway to induce an upregulation of α2-macroglobulin, a nonspecific protease inhibitor produced by Sertoli cells, apparently being used to avoid unwanted proteolysis of the seminiferous epithelium [60], offering a protective function. This involvement of JNK pathway mediated by cadmium is confirmed in study using a JNK-specific inhibitor dimethylaminopurine (DMAP), because DMAP was found to worsen CdCl2-induced testicular damage [60]. Collectively, these findings illustrate that cadmium mediates its disruptive effects at the BTB via the p38 MAPK signaling pathway; it also induces JNK signaling pathway which is likely used by the testis to serve as a protective mechanism to limit unwanted damage to the seminiferous epithelium following cadmium exposure. The cadmium-induced activation of p38 and JNK pathways have also been confirmed in studies using three-dimensional Sertoli cell-gonocytes co-cultures [65]. Taken together, these findings provide insightful information regarding a therapeutic approach to modulate CdCl2-induced male infertility, such as via the use of either specific p38 MAPK inhibitor or in combination with JNK activator.

3.2.3 Cadmium modulates Sertoli cell BTB function via FAK
FAK, a nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase, is an emerging BTB regulator [66]. TJ proteins occludin and ZO-1 interact with FAK in the rat testis, and they are also putative substrates of FAK [67,68]. CdCl2 is known to downregulate the expression of two activated/phosphorylated forms of FAK, p-FAK-Tyr397 and p-FAK-Tyr576, which are integrated component of the apical ES and they are highly expressed at the apical ES from stage VII through stage VIII until shortly before spermiation [68]. Furthermore, reducing the level of p-FAK-Tyr397, such as by overexpressing a non-phosphorylated FAK Y397F mutant in Sertoli cells or by increasing the level of p-FAK-Tyr407, such as by overexpressing a phosphomimetic FAK Y407E mutant in Sertoli cells, was shown to promote the Sertoli cell TJ barrier function (i.e., making the TJ barrier tighter) [56], illustrating that these activated/phosphorylated FAK are important regulators of BTB function. Collectively, these findings suggest that FAK may be a target of cadmium toxicity in the testis. Indeed, knockdown of FAK in Sertoli cells with a functional TJ barrier was found to desensitize these cells to CdCl2-induced BTB disruption [67]. These findings also illustrate that FAK small interfering RNA duplexes, phosphomimetic FAK Y407E mutant or non-phosphorylated FAK Y397F mutant may be potential therapeutic drugs to mediate cadmium-induced toxicity in the testis.

3.2.4 Cadmium perturbs Sertoli cell actin cytoskeleton
Similar to BPA, cadmium is known to induce disruption of F-actin organization in human Sertoli cells dose-dependently (Table 1) [17]. Exposure of human Sertoli cells cultured in vitro to CdCl2 at 0.5 μM caused only truncation of actin microfilaments in Sertoli cell cytosol; however, at 5 and 20 μM, although they are still not cytotoxic to Sertoli cells, CdCl2 was shown to cause retraction of actin microfilaments from the cell cytosol to surrounding the cell nucleus, besides defragmentation, which is likely mediated by changes in the distribution and/or expression of actin regulatory proteins Arp3 and Eps8 [17]. Future studies need to focus on the role of p-FAK-Tyr397 and/or p-FAK-Tyr407 in the cadmium-induced cytoskeleton disruption in human Sertoli cells, since their overexpression may interfere with the cadmium-mediated testis toxicity.

3.2.5 Summary
i) Cadmium perturbs Sertoli cell BTB function by activating TGF-β3/p38 MAPK signaling pathway, and also JNK pathway which protects unwanted nonspecific proteolysis of the seminiferous epithelium; ii) cadmium downregulates the expression of both p-FAK-Tyr397 and p-FAK-Tyr576 during the cadmium-mediated BTB disruption; and iii) cadmium-induced actin cytoskeleton disruption at the human Sertoli cell BTB is mediated by mislocalization of Arp3 and Eps8.

3.3 Perfluorooctane sulfonate
3.3.1 Introduction
Perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of chemicals, most notably PFOS and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), widely used in industries and are integrated in commercial products used for coatings of textiles, paper, upholstery and carpet, as well additives in fire-retardant products [69]. Human exposure to PFOS comes from contaminated food and drinking water [70]. The estimated human daily intake of PFOS and PFOA is 1.6 and 2.9 ng/kg b.w., respectively [19]. Due to the relatively long half-life of PFAS in humans, ~ 5.4 years for PFOS and ~ 3.8 years for PFOA [71], these toxicants can build up in tissues and/or organs overtime to cause toxicity [72]. High doses of PFOS and PFOA have shown to induce hepatotoxicity, developmental toxicity, immunotoxicity, endocrine disruption and neurotoxicity in humans and other mammals [73]. Human exposure to high levels of perfluoroalkyls is also associated with reduced number of normal spermatozoa in men [74], and infertility [75]. These findings illustrate that PFOS is a reproductive toxicant. In fact, PFOS has been banned in North America and Europe, but it remains widely used in China.

3.3.2 PFOS perturbs Sertoli cell actin cytoskeleton
In primary rat Sertoli cell cultures, PFOS was shown to induce defragmentation and truncation of actin microfilaments in Sertoli cells without downregulating the steady-state level of β-actin [76]. This PFOS-mediated disruption of actin filaments was also detected in rat Sertoli cell-gonocytes co-culture system [77]. It was shown that the PFOS-induced F-actin disruption is mediated via a downregulation of actin crosslinking and bundling proteins filamin A and palladin, leading to de-bundling of actin microfilaments necessary to maintain the integrity of the ES at the Sertoli cell–cell and/or Sertoli–spermatid interface [76]. This in turn causes redistribution of TJ (e.g., occludin/ZO-1) and basal ES (e.g., N-cadherin/β-catenin) protein complexes, moving from cell–cell interface to cell cytosol, thereby destabilizing the Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier [76]. Consistent with these findings, PFOS was found to induce mouse Sertoli cell TJ barrier disruption, mediated by changes in the localization of adhesion proteins at the Sertoli cell–cell interface, and similar observations were also noted in the mouse testis in vivo [78]. Also, there was a loss of actin microfilaments at the basal ES/TJ at the BTB in the testis in vivo following treatment of mice with PFOS [78]. Interestingly, the PFOS-induced Sertoli cell TJ barrier disruption was also induced by p38 MAPK activation downstream, because the use of a selective p38 MAPK-specific inhibitor SB203580 could significantly block the PFOS-mediated TJ barrier disruption and the associated changes in adhesion protein distribution at the cell–cell interface [78]. In this context, it is of interest to note that the ERK1/2 was also activated by PFOS in the mouse testis but only when PFOS was used at high doses, such as ≥ 25 mg/kg/day [78]. These findings thus illustrate that the PFOS-induced Sertoli cell BTB disruption is also mediated via p38 MAPK, analogous to the cadmium-mediated Sertoli cell TJ disruption [63,64]. It remains to be determined if PFOS induces F-actin disruption in human Sertoli cells via changes in the expression and/or localization/distribution of actin regulatory proteins Eps8 and Arp3 similar to BPA and cadmium [17].

3.3.3 PFOS perturbs Sertoli cell GJ function
Treatment of rat or mouse Sertoli cell cultures with PFOS leads to a downregulation of Cx43, which is associated with a redistribution of Cx43, moving away from the cell–cell interface [76,78] – apparently the result of enhanced endocytosis and endocytic vesicle-mediated intracellular degradation [76]. Based on the FRAP assay that functionally monitors GJ-based intercellular communication between Sertoli cells, PFOS perturbs GJ function in Sertoli cell cultures with an established TJ barrier [76]. In this context, it is of interest to note that PFOS also downregulates p-Cx43-Ser368 level in mouse Sertoli cells [78]. Nonylphenol, an environmental estrogenic toxicant, has been shown to downregulate p-Cx43 expression in TM4 cells (a mouse Sertoli cell line) via an inactivation of p38 MAPK but not PKC, thereby disrupting GJ communication [79]. However, PFOS was found to activate p38 and ERK pathways in primary mouse Sertoli cells during PFOS-mediated Cx43 reduction [78]. Although these differences could be the result of using primary Sertoli cell cultures versus cell line [80], they illustrate consistently that PFOS and other environmental toxicants (e.g., nonylphenol) can induce GJ communication failure, which is possibly mediated by MAPK downstream. This possibility must be carefully evaluated in future studies since these findings can lead to better therapeutic management of toxicant-induced male infertility.

3.3.4 PFOS modulates Sertoli cell BTB function via FAK
p-FAK-Tyr407 and p-FAK-Tyr397 are known to promote and perturb the Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier function, respectively, in the rat testis [76]. PFOS has shown to downregulate and upregulate p-FAK-Tyr407 and p-FAK-Tyr397 levels, respectively [76], suggesting that the PFOS-induced Sertoli cell BTB disruption is mediated by these phosphorylated forms of FAK downstream. In fact, overexpression of FAK Y407E phosphomimetic mutant in Sertoli cells alleviates PFOS-induced of TJ barrier disruption, and microRNA-mediated FAK knockdown worsens the disruptive effect of PFOS [76]. Collectively, these findings illustrate that p-FAK-Tyr407 is a likely therapeutic target to manage PFOS-induced infertility via the possible use of a FAK Y407E phosphomimetic mutant, such as an activator of p-FAK that mimics p-FAK-Tyr407.

3.3.5 Summary
i) PFOS disrupts Sertoli cell actin cytoskeleton in Sertoli cells by downregulating the expression of actin regulatory proteins filamin A and palladin; ii) PFOS exerts its disruptive effect via p38 and ERK pathways; iii) PFOS perturbs GJ communication by downregulating Cx43 and p-Cx43- Ser368 expression; and iv) PFOS perturbs Sertoli cell TJ barrier function by downregulating and upregulating p-FAK-Tyr407 and p-FAK-Tyr397 expression, respectively.

3.4 Crosstalk and interaction among environmental toxicants BPA, cadmium and PFOS
As briefly discussed herein, BPA, cadmium and PFOS share some common signaling pathways and/or target molecules to exert their disruptive effects in the testis. For instance, exposure of rat Sertoli cells to BPA and PFOS causes downregulation and redistribution of Cx43 at the Sertoli cell–cell interface, thereby disrupting GJ communication as both BPA and PFOS are known to perturb Sertoli cell GJ channel function [42,76]. These findings suggest that Cx43 is a likely therapeutic target to intervene the disruptive effects of BPA and PFOS at the Sertoli cell BTB. Furthermore, MAPK (e.g., ERK1/2, p38 MAPK) is the emerging downstream signaling pathway activated by BPA, cadmium and PFOS based on studies in vitro and in vivo (Table 1). Once the common signaling cascade(s) that involved MAPK is better characterized, it will also provide insightful information on therapeutic intervention, such as the use of small-molecule inhibitors against MAPK. Studies have shown that there are crosstalks between FAK and MAPK. For instance, autophosphorylation of FAK at Tyr397 can unfold a binding site for c-Src, so that c-Src phosphorylates FAK at Tyr925, which in turn serves as a binding site for growth factor receptor bound protein-2 (Grb2)–son of sevenless (Sos) complex, and the Grb2-Sos complex acts as a mediator to activate Ras/MAPK pathway [81,82]. This, thus, leads to interaction between FAK and MAPK. As noted herein, both FAK and MAPK signal pathways are involved in environmental toxicant-induced testicular injury (Table 1), and research is needed to delineate the molecular mechanism(s) that regulates crosstalk between these signal pathways, which will be helpful in gaining insightful information to intervene toxicant-induced testicular injury.

4. Role of drug transporters in toxicant-mediated testis injury
Drug transporters are integral membrane proteins widely expressed by mammalian cells including Sertoli cells and cancer cells that prevent the entry and/or accumulation of toxicants and drugs, such as chemotherapeutic drugs and potential male contraceptives, inside eukaryotic cell [23,83]. Although drug transporters, including influx and efflux drug pumps, are crucial to maintain cell homeostasis and to protect cells from environmental toxicants, some toxicants appear to be able to disguise themselves, bypassing the network of drug transporters, such as in the testis [23,83]. Although efflux and influx drug transporters have been identified in the testis [23], few functional studies were done that probed the mechanism(s) by which environmental toxicants entered the testis. Since Sertoli cells near the basement membrane of the seminiferous tubule create the BTB, toxicants must be capable of passing the BTB to induce injury. Studies have shown that toxicants can traverse the Sertoli cell BTB by downregulating efflux drug transporters. For instance, cadmium at 15 μM was shown to downregulate the expression of P-glycoprotein and multidrug resistance-related protein 1 in Sertoli cell cultures with an established functional TJ barrier [84]. Cadmium also downregulated the expression of influx drug transporters organic anion transporting polypeptide protein 3 (Oatp3) and solute carrier family 15 member 1 (also known as peptide transporter-1) [84]. This downregulation of multiple drug transporters can trigger the unwanted entry of xenobiotics and drugs (e.g., a potential male contraceptive adjudin known to induce germ cell loss, most notably elongating/elongated spermatids from the testis [85]) into the testis behind the BTB as illustrated in studies by RNAi, in which the knockdown of drug transporters led to accumulation of [3H]-adjudin behind the Sertoli cell BTB [86,87]. It is known that the entry of cadmium behind the BTB in the mouse testis is mediated by a cadmium-specific influx drug transporter known as Slc39a8 (also called Zip8) [88] since its mutation or deletion can insensitize the mutant mice to cadmium exposure/toxicity. However, it is not known if Slc39a8 is found in the rat or human testis. Furthermore, specific drug transporters for other environmental toxicants have now been identified. Also, PFOS, nonylphenol and other estrogenic (or androgenic)-based toxicants enter cells by polyspecific transporters such as influx drug transporter Oatp1d1 [89]. In short, much research is needed to better understand the interaction of environmental toxicants and drug transporters in Sertoli cells and the testis so that activators of drug transporters can be used to protect humans from toxicant exposure.

5. Molecular models by which environmental toxicants perturb Sertoli and spermatid adhesion at the ES
Sertoli cell cytoskeleton appears to be one of the primary targets of environmental toxicants [16,85]. For instance, the MT-based cytoskeleton particularly in the Sertoli cell was shown to be disrupted during toxicant-induced testis injury following treatment of rodents with 2,5-hexanedione, carbendazim, phthalates and others [16]. Studies have shown that the polarized MT-based cytoskeleton in Sertoli cells is crucial for providing the ‘track’ for the transport of residual bodies as well as spermatids and also endocytic vesicles across the adluminal compartment throughout the epithelial cycle of spermatogenesis [90,91]. Thus, MT disruption induced by toxicants was found to cause: i) failure and defects in spermatid transport and spermiation in which spermatids remained embedded deep inside the epithelium in stage VIII or stage IX tubules; ii) failure in fluid secretion by Sertoli cells; and iii) germ cell apoptosis [16]. However, the underlying molecular mechanism(s) by which MT-based cytoskeleton was disrupted by toxicants remains to be elucidated. Recent studies have shown that toxicants may exert their effects in altering the spatiotemporal expression of MT regulatory proteins, such as MT-associated protein [MAP]/MT affinity-regulating kinase 4 (MARK4), which is a MT-stabilizing protein kinase [92]. In a study using adjudin as model, considerable changes in the spatiotemporal expression of MARK4 as well as its downregulation at the apical ES were noted, which thus impeded spermatid adhesion, leading to defects in spermatid adhesion and transport [93]. Besides MT-based cytoskeleton, recent studies have also shown that environmental toxicants, such as PFOS, BPA and cadmium also perturb the organization of polarized actin microfilaments in Sertoli cells, most notably at the apical and basal ES, including human Sertoli cells (Table 1) [17,68,76]. This toxicant-induced disorganization of F-actin network at the ES, including truncation and/or defragmentation of actin microfilaments, thus perturbs spermatid adhesion and polarity, and also Sertoli cell–cell adhesion, leading to germ cell exfoliation and BTB disruption. Since cell junctions at the Sertoli cell–cell and Sertoli–spermatid interface are mostly using actin-based cytoskeleton as their site of attachment, defragmentation of F-actin thus destabilizes the TJ (i.e., occludin-ZO-1), basal ES (i.e., N-cadherin-β-catenin), and apical ES (i.e., β1-integrin-laminin- α3β3γ3), leading to a loss of cell adhesion in these anchoring junctions. However, the molecular mechanisms by which environment toxicants mediate these changes remain largely unknown until recent years. Whereas mechanistic study by which environmental toxicants induce cytoskeleton disruption remains scarce, studies in testicular toxicants such as potential male contraceptives (i.e., adjudin) have provided some insightful information on this process [85]. For instance, many of the phenotypes detected in the rat or mouse testis following exposure of rodents to environmental toxicants such as cadmium, PFOS and others are also detected in the rat testis following treatment with adjudin. These include the presence of multinucleated round spermatids and multinucleated spermatocytes in the seminiferous epithelium, degenerating spermatocytes, loss of spermatid polarity, presence of round spermatids/spermatocytes in tubule lumen, reduction of tubule diameter, closing up of tubule lumen due to defects in tubule secretion and focal injury of Sertoli cells as manifested by the presence of large vacuoles in cell cytosol [85] and most notably defragmentation and truncation of actin microfilaments in Sertoli cells when the testis was examined by electron microscopy [94]. Studies performed in the past decade have shown that this adjudin-induced testis injury regarding the actin-based cytoskeleton is mediated by changes in the spatiotemporal expression of two groups of acin-regulatory proteins at the ES [85]: i) branched actin-inducing proteins, such as the Arp2/3 complex, that effectively induce actin filaments from a bundled to an unbundled/branched configuration [95]; and ii) the actin bundling proteins, such as Eps8 (also an actin barbed end capping protein) [96], palladin [97] and fascin 1 [98] (both palladin and fascin 1 are actin crosslinking proteins), that confer actin filaments their bundled configuration. In normal testis, the expression of Arp3 at the apical ES is virtually limited to the concave (ventral) side of spermatid head at stage VII of the cycle, but none expressed at the basal ES/BTB at stage VII [95], which is being used to facilitate extensive endocytic vesicle-mediated protein trafficking events at the site so that ‘old’ apical ES proteins can be recycled to assemble ‘new’ apical ES that arises when step 8 spermatids first appear in stage VIII cycle [99]. At the basal ES/BTB, Arp3 is not expressed until in stage VIII tubules [95] when it is used to induce BTB restructuring to facilitate the transport of preleptotene spermatocytes across the immunological barrier [99]. On the other hand, Eps8 is also highly expressed at the apical ES in stage VII tubules, both at the concave and convex (dorsal) side of spermatid heads [96] to confer spermatid adhesion, whereas endocytic vesicle-mediated trafficking takes place at the concave side of spermatid heads to facilitate endocytosis, transcytosis and recycling of ‘old’ apical ES protein to assembly ‘new’ apical ES. However, Eps8 is prominently expressed at the basal ES/BTB in stage VII tubules (to confer actin filaments their bundled configuration to maintain basal ES function) but none at stage VIII [96]. This differential but spatiotemporal expression of these two groups of proteins thus provides a unique mechanism for the rapid reorganization of actin microfilaments at the ES in both sites by rapidly converting microfilaments from their bundled to unbundled/branched configuration and vice versa. However, following treatment of rats with adjudin, this toxicant causes a disruption of the stage-specific spatiotemporal expression of Arp3, Eps8 and palladin via their mislocalization [95-97], as well as considerable downregulation and mislocalization of fascin 1 [98]. For instance, Eps8 and palladin no longer restrictively expressed at the apical ES at stage VII, instead, they are down-regulated and mislocalized, no longer limited to the apical and basal ES [96,97]. At the same time, Arp3 is no longer restricted to the concave side of spermatid heads, but spread across the entire apical ES and also expressed at the basal ES/BTB [95], thereby perturbing proper localization of cell adhesion proteins at both sites. The combined effect of these changes leads to spermatid loss and the eventual disruption of the BTB [99]. In short, toxicants induce restructuring of the apical ES in early and elongating spermatids by disrupting the actin microfilament organization, pushing immature spermatids to undergo ‘spermiation’; toxicants also induce similar changes at the basal ES/BTB, forcing the BTB to enter a stage VIII-like restructuring, reversing the timely events of the epithelial cycle (Figure 2). These changes in the localization of actin regulatory proteins following toxicant-induced germ cell defoliation from the testis may be regulated, at least in part, by FAK, in particular p-FAK-Tyr407 and p-FAK-Tyr397, based on recent studies [56,100]. For instance, p-FAK-Tyr397 is known to confer apical ES integrity and its presence is detected at the apical ES until spermiation at late stage VIII [56,101,102]. Overexpression of p-FAK-Tyr397 in the testis in vivo was found to disrupt the spatiotemporal expression of Eps8 and Arp3 at the apical ES in which some of these proteins persisted at the apical ES in stage VIII tubules, causing some spermatids to become embedded in the seminiferous epithelium, leading to defects in spermiation [100]. On the other hand, overexpression of p-FAK-Tyr407 in Sertoli cell epithelium with a functional TJ barrier via the use of a phosphomimetic mutant FAK Y407E was found to induce branched actin polymerization and the recruitment of N-WASP to Arp3 to active the Arp2/3 complex [56]. Collectively, these findings illustrate the likelihood of involvement of p-FAK-Tyr397 and p-FAK-Tyr407 on the spatiotemporal localization and/or inducing intrinsic activity of these actin regulatory proteins. The concepts briefly outlined here help us to propose a model depicting toxicant-induced ‘spermiation’, as shown in Figure 2, and toxicant-induced BTB remodeling, as shown in Figure 3. Although the models depicted in Figure 2 are formulated based on studies using adjudin [85], recent studies as summarized and discussed in this review also support the hypothetical concepts that environmental toxicants exert their effects on cytoskeletons, mediated by signaling proteins, such as FAK and MAPK (e.g., ERK1/2, p38 MAPK). It is obvious that the models shown herein will be rapidly updated when more data are available. Nonetheless, these two models serve as the framework for future investigations.

6. Concluding remarks and future perspectives
As briefly discussed above, environmental toxicants appear to induce testis injury by activating some common signaling molecule(s) or event(s) in the Sertoli cell, which include: i) activation of MAPK pathway or FAK, in particular p-FAK-Tyr397 or p-FAK-Tyr407; and ii) disruption of GJ function. Furthermore, the MT- and actin-based cytoskeletons are tightly involved in toxicant-induced testis injury, and the role of the MT and actin regulatory proteins should be carefully elucidated in future studies since this information is exceedingly helpful in developing therapeutic approaches to interfere toxicant-induced male reproductive dysfunction. In this context, it is of interest to note that the component of MAPK pathway, especially p38, is also a drug target for inflammatory diseases and cancer by using small-molecular inhibitors of p38. Due to the ubiquitous function of MAPK in mammalian cells, a major obstacle of MAPK-directed therapeutic approach is tissue-specific delivery of the inhibitors. Considerable downregulation on the expression of Cx43 as noted in Sertoli cells following treatment with environment toxicants, such as BPA, CdCl2 and PFOS, suggest that Cx43 may also be a molecular target of toxicants in the testis. Restoration of the lost Cx43-mediated GJ function may be a possible therapeutic strategy to reverse toxicant-induced testis injury. Furthermore, it must be noted that even though Sertoli cells, in particular human Sertoli cells, cultured in vitro may provide a novel model to study the molecular mechanism(s) by which environmental toxicants induce testis injury such as at the Sertoli cell BTB, cells cultured in vitro are different from cells in the in vivo microenvironment in many ways. For instance, cells in vitro can metabolize toxicants differently than cells in vivo in a multicellular environment. Thus, some of the observations seen in vitro may not necessarily be reproduced in vivo, and it is likely that a combination of both in vitro and in vivo approaches should be used. Nonetheless, the use of an in vitro system should reduce the burden of using a large number of life animals for tedious and also expensive in vivo experiments until sufficient information is gathered before the launch of an expanded in vivo study.

7. Expert opinion

        1) Research has shown that the Sertoli cell is a target of toxicant-mediated reproductive dysfunction in the male, both in rodents and in humans. However, much of the research that examined the effects of environmental toxicants on Sertoli cells are limited to changes in the expression of genes, sets of genes or a target protein relevant to Sertoli cell function. For instance, it is well established that the Sertoli cell microtubule-based cytoskeleton is a prime target of environmental toxicants, such as 2,5-hexanedione and phthalates; whereas the Sertoli cell actin-based cytoskeleton is a target of cadmium, PFOS and/or BPA. The underlying molecular mechanism(s), however, remain largely unexplored. Furthermore, most of the studies performed thus far were based on studies of Sertoli cells in rodents. However, recent advances in culture techniques allow the use of human Sertoli cells which remain mitotically active when cultured in vitro in the presence of fetal calf serum. These new findings are highlighted herein. But cautions are also noted that there are limitation of using Sertoli cells in vitro, and it is obvious that some limited studies in vivo are need to confirm and expand observations in vitro.

2) If the molecular targets and/or the underlying mechanism(s) are identified and known, toxicant-mediated Sertoli cell dysfunction that leads to male infertility can be therapeutically managed, and possibly treated. This thus provides hopes to many men suffering from unexplained infertility.

3) In recent years, the use of rat Sertoli cell culture system in vitro that mimics the Sertoli cell BTB in vivo has been exceedingly helpful in providing a better alternative to study the mechanism of toxicant-induced reproductive dysfunction. However, one of the limiting factors in the field is the lack of reliable human Sertoli cell culture system in vitro for studies since some of the phenotypes noted in rodents may not be physiologically relevant to humans. Recent advances in human Sertoli cell cultures have provide much excitement in the field; in particular, human Sertoli cells remain proliferative if cultured in the presence of fetal calf serum, so that freshly isolated human Sertoli cells are not needed for studies.

4) It is likely that the better use of human Sertoli cell cultures in vitro will energize the field of reproductive toxicology since human Sertoli cells can be maintained for long-term cultures with satisfactory proliferation rate. This also eliminates the reliance of Sertoli cells from rodents, speeding up the transition of research findings from laboratory bench to bed side.

5) Recent advances in the field, and areas of research that deserve more research and attentions are highlighted in this opinion article.


      

C Yan Cheng was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (U54 HD029990, Project 5 and R01HD56034).

Declaration of interest

The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

Figure 1 Illustration showing that BPA-induced apoptosis in Sertoli and germ cells are mediated by distinctive signaling molecules
ADAM17: A disintegrin and metalloprotease-17; BPA: Bisphenol A; ERK: Extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; JNK: c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase.

Figure 2 A schematic diagram that illustrates the likely mechanism by which environmental toxicants induce germ cell exfoliation from the mammalian testis
In the testis, such as in a stage VII to early VIII tubule, elongating and elongated spermatids remain adhered onto the Sertoli cell in the seminiferous epithelium by apical ES, conferred by actin microfilament bundles that are sandwiched between endoplasmic reticulum and the Sertoli cell plasma membrane (left panel). These actin microfilament bundles also serve as the attachment site for apical ES adhesion proteins (e.g., Sertoli cell-specific adhesion proteins nectin-2, α6β1-integrin; and spermatid-specific adhesion proteins nectin-3, laminin- α3β3γ3). Actin microfilament bundles are maintained by the actin bundling proteins such as Eps8, palladin, fascin 1 and ezrin that are found in the testis. Furthermore, the proper expression and/or localization/distribution of these actin bundling proteins are likely maintained by several protein kinases including p-FAK-Tyr397, and also ERK and p38 MAPK. However, following exposure of the testis to the environmental toxicants, such as cadmium and PFOS, these toxicants induce unwanted activation of ERK1/2, p38 MAPK and/or downregulation of p-FAK-Tyr397, causing changes in the spatiotemporal expression of actin bundling proteins. Instead, branched actin-inducing proteins such as the Arp2/3 complex activated N-WASP, causing unwanted reorganization of F-actin network, rendering actin microfilaments to become a truncated and branched network, thereby destabilizing the adhesion proteins at the apical ES (middle panel). In short, the loss of actin microfilaments at the apical ES enhances endocytic vesicle-mediated protein trafficking with these adhesion proteins being internalized and transcytosed, to be followed by either recycling or endosome-mediated degradation. The net result is the unwanted depletion of germ cells from the seminiferous epithelium (right panel). This hypothetical model is prepared based on recent findings as briefly discussed in the text. This model, however, depicts several molecular targets that can be tackled to block toxicant-induced germ cell loss from the testis, such as the use of small-molecule inhibitors to block unwanted activation of MAPK and/or downregulation of p-FAK-Tyr397, as well as by blocking unwanted changes in the spatiotemporal expression of actin regulatory proteins.

ERK: Extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; ES: Ectoplasmic specialization; FAK: Focal adhesion kinase; N-WASP: Neuronal Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein; PFOS: Perfluorooctane sulfonate.

Figure 3 A schematic diagram that illustrates the likely mechanism by which environmental toxicants induce Sertoli cell BTB disruption in the mammalian testis
In the testis, such as in a stage VII tubule, the Sertoli cell BTB is maintained by properly organized F-actin network in which actin microfilaments are bundled and sandwiched between cisternae of endoplasmic reticulum and the Sertoli cell plasma membrane. These actin microfilament bundles also serve as the attachment site for adhesion protein complexes, such as TJ protein complexes: occludin/ZO-1, JAM-A/ZO-1; basal ES protein complex: N-cadherin/β-catenin; and GJ protein complex: Cx43/plakophilin 2. Actin microfilaments at the basal ES/BTB are maintained by spatiotemporal expression of actin bundling proteins such as Eps8, palladin, fascin 1 and ezrin, which are conferred by proper expression of p-FAK-Tyr407, p38 MAPK and/or ERK1/2 (left panel). However, following exposure of the testis to environmental toxicants (e.g., cadmium, PFOS or BPA), either p38 MAPK/ERK1/2 is activated or p-FAK-Tyr407 is down-regulated (or both), this thus perturbs the spatiotemporal expression of actin bundling proteins vs. branched actin-inducing proteins (e.g., Arp2/3 complex and N-WASP). The predominant Arp2/3 complex/N-WASP thus converts F-actin from its bundled configuration to a branched/unbundled configuration, destabilizing adhesion protein complexes at the basal ES/BTB. This, in turn, induces endocytic vesicle-mediated protein trafficking, causing endocytosis of integral membrane proteins at the Sertoli cell BTB, either to be transcytosed and recycled or undergo endosome-mediated degradation (middle panel). The net result of these changes contributes to a disruption of the Sertoli cell BTB (right panel), so that environmental toxicants can get access to the adluminal compartment, causing extensive germ cell exfoliation as shown in Figure 2.

BPA: Bisphenol A; BTB: Blood–testis barrier; ERK: Extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; ES: Ectoplasmic specialization; FAK: Focal adhesion kinase; GJ: Gap junction; N-WASP: Neuronal Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome protein; PFOS: Perfluorooctane sulfonate.

Table 1 Effects of environmental toxicants on Sertoli cell functions and the involving signaling molecules*.

Toxicant	In vitro /in vivo
study/dosage	Junction protein
expression	Junction protein
localization/
distribution	Modulation of
pertinent signaling
pathway(s)/
molecule(s)	F-actin
organization	Cell apoptosis	Ref.	
PFOS	In vitro study: 20 ~ 30
μM	In vitro study:
filamin A (−), palladin (−),
Cx43 (−), p-Cx43-Ser368 (−),
ZO-1 (−), claudin-11 (−),
occludin (−), N-cadherin (−),
p-FAK-Tyr407 (−), p-FAK-
Tyr397 (+)	In vitro study: filamin
A (−), palladin (−),
Cx43 (−), ZO-1 (−),
occludin (−),
N-cadherin (−),
β-catenin (−)	FAK, p38, ERK	Truncation,
defragmentation	No obvious
apoptosis in Sertoli
cell-gonocyte
co-cultures	[76,78,103]	
	In vivo study:
2.5 mg/kg/d;
50 mg/kg/d;
oral gavage	In vivo study:
ZO-1 (−), occludin (−),
claudin-11 (−), Cx43 (−),
p-Cx43- Ser368 (−)	In vivo study:
N.D.					
Cadmium	In vitro study:
3 μM	In vitro study:
occludin (−), ZO-1 (−), JAM-A
(−), N-cadherin (−), β-catenin
(−), FAK (−), p-FAK-Tyr397 (−),
c-Src (−), p-Src-Tyr529 (−)	In vitro study: occludin
(−), ZO-1 (−), FAK (−)	TGF-β2, TGF-β3,
p38, JNK, FAK,
c-Src	Truncation,
defragmentation	Induction of
apoptosis in Sertoli
cell-gonocyte
co-cultures	[17,60,63,64,67,68,104,105]	
	In vitro study (human
Sertoli cells):
5, 20 μM	In vitro study (human Sertoli
cells):
Arp3 (−)	In vitro study (human
Sertoli cells):
ZO-1 (−),
N-cadherin (−),
β-catenin (−), Eps8 (−),
c-Src (−), annexin II (−)		Truncation,
disorganization			
	In vivo study:
3 mg/kg. b.w., i.p.	In vivo study:
α2-MG (+), occludin (−),
ZO-1 (−), N-cadherin (−),
E-cadherin (−), β-catenin (−),
nectin-3 (−), γ-catenin (−),
l-afadin (−), Cx43 (−),
β1-integrin (−), actin (−),
vimentin (−), α-tubulin (−),
MMP-3 (−), uPA (−),cathepsin
L (+), cystatin C (+), FAK (−),
p-FAK-Tyr397 (−), p-FAK-
Tyr 576 (−), c-Src (−), p-c-Src-
Tyr416 (−), p-c-Src-Tyr529 (−)	In vivo study:
occludin (−), ZO-1 (−),
N-cadherin (−),
β-catenin (−), FAK (−)					
BPA	In vitro study:
40, 200 μM	In vitro study:
Cx43 (−),p-Cx43-Ser368 (−),
occludin (−), JAM-A (−), ZO-1
(−), N-cadherin (−), α-catenin
(−), β-catenin (−), β1-integrin
(−), c-Src (−), desmoglein-2 (−)	In vitro study:
Cx43 (−), N-cadherin
(−), occludin (−)	ERK1/2	Truncation,
defragmentation	Induction of Sertoli
cell apoptosis via
CaM/CaMKII/ERK
(in mouse TM4
cells), Pten/Akt,
JNK/p38 MAPK,
NF-κB and/or Fas/
FasL signaling
molecules
downstream	[17,20,37,38,52-54]	
	In vitro study (human
Sertoli cells):
40, 200 μM	In vitro study (human Sertoli
cells):
ZO-1 (−), N-cadherin (−),
β-catenin (−), c-Src (−),
Annexin II (−)	In vitro study (human
Sertoli cells):
ZO-1 (−), N-cadherin
(−), β-catenin (−), Eps8
(−), c-Src (−), annexin II
(−)		Truncation,
retraction,
disorganization		
	In vivo study:
10, 50 mg/kg b.w.,
oral gavage	In vivo study:
occludin (−), nectin-3 (−)	In vivo study:
occludin (−)					
* Studies were performed using primary Sertoli cell cultures from rodents for in vitro studies and rodents for in vivo studies unless otherwise specified.

(−): Downregulation or mislocalization; (+): Upregulation; α2-MG: α2-macroglobulin; BPA: Bisphenol A; b.w.: Body weight; Cx43: Connexin 43; d: Day; ERK: Extracellular signal-regulated kinase; FAK: Focal adhesion kinase; i.p.: Intraperitoneal injection; JAM-A: Junctional adhesion molecule-A; JNK: c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase; N.D.: Not determined; PFOS: Perfluorooctane sulfonate; Pten: Phosphatase and tensin homolog; uPA: Urokinase plasminogen activator; ZO-1: Zonula occludens-1.

Article highlights
Sertoli cell junctions, and actin- and MT-based cytoskeletons are the target of environmental toxicants.

Human and rodent Sertoli cells cultured in vitro provide the valuable tools to study blood-testis barrier function and toxicant-mediated testicular injury.


   Bibliography
Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest (•) or of considerable interest (••) to readers.

1 
            Kilchevsky A  
            Honig S  
           Male factor infertility in 2011: semen quality, sperm selection and hematospermia Nat Rev Urol 2012 9 68 70 22249183 
2 
            Carlsen E  
            Giwercman A  
            Keiding N  
             
           Evidence for decresing quality of semen during past 50 years BMJ 1992 6854 609 13 1393072 
3 
            Geoffroy-Siraudin C  
            Loundou Ad  
            Romain F  
             
           Decline of semen quality among 10932 males consulting for couple infertility over a 20-year period in Marseille, France Asian J Androl 2012 14 584 90 22522503 
4 
            Jorgensen N  
            Vierula M  
            Jacobsen R  
             
           Recent adverse trends in semen quality and testis cancer incidence among Finnish men Int J Androl 2011 34 e37 48 21366607 
5 
            Saidi JA  
            Chang DT  
            Goluboff ET  
             
           Declining sperm counts in the United States? A critical review J Urol 1999 161 460 2 9915426 
6 
            Jorgensen N  
            Andersen AG  
            Eustache F  
             
           Regional differences in semen quality in Europe Hum Reprod 2001 16 1012 19 11331653 
7 Nordkap L  Joensen UN  Blomberg JM    Regional differences and temporal trends in male reproductive health disorders: semen quality may be a sensitive marker of environmental exposures Mol Cell Endocrinol 2012 355 221 30 22138051  • An important review illustrating that semen quality is a sensitive marker of human exposure to environmental toxicants.


8 
            Mehrpour O  
            Karrari P  
            Zamani N  
             
           Occupational expxosure to pesticides and consequences on male semen and ferility: a review Toxicol Lett 2014 230 146 56 24487096 
9 
            Kovac JR  
            Pastuszak AW  
            Lamb DJ  
           The use of genomics, proteomics and metabolomics in identifying biomarkers of male infertility Fertil Sertil 2013 99 998 1007 
10 
            Luevano J  
            Damodaran C  
           A review of molecular events of cadmium-ineduced carcinogenesis J Environ pathol Toxicol Oncol 2014 33 183 94 25272057 
11 
            Feki-Tounsi M  
            Hamza-Chaffai A  
           Cadmium as a possible cause of bladder cancer: a review of accumulated evidence Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 2014 21 10561 73 24894749 
12 
            Chang ET  
            Adami HO  
            Boffetta P  
             
           A critical review of perfluorooctanoate and perfluorooctanesulfonate exposure and cancer risk in humans Crit Rev Toxicol 2014 44 Suppl 1 1 81 24793953 
13 Wong EWP  Cheng CY   Impacts of environmental toxicants on male reproductive dysfunction Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011 32 290 9 21324536  • A concise summary illustrating the role of reactive oxygen species in mediating toxicant-induced testis injurty.


14 
            Aitken RJ  
            Smith TB  
            Jobling MS  
             
           Oxidative stress and male reproductive health Asian J Androl 2014 16 31 8 24369131 
15 
            Boekelheide K  
            Fleming SL  
            Allio T  
             
           2,5-Hexanedione-induced testicular injury Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxciol 2003 43 125 47 
16 Johnson KJ   Testicular histopathology associated with disruption of the Sertoli cell cytoskeleton Spermatogenesis 2014 4 e979106 26413393  •• An excellent summary on toxicant-induced Sertoli cell cytoskeletal disruption.


17 
            Xiao X  
            Mruk DD  
            Tang EI  
             
           Environmental toxicants perturb human Serotli cell adhesive function via changes in F-actin organization medicated by actin regulatory proteins Hum Reprod 2014 29 1279 91 24532171 
18 
            Cheng CY  
            Wong EWP  
            Lie PPY  
             
           Environmental toxicants and male reproductive function Spermatogenesis 2011 1 2 13 21866273 
19 
            Wan HT  
            Mruk DD  
            Wong CKC  
             
           Targeting testis-specific proteins to inhibit spermatogenesis - lession from endocrine disrupting chemicals Expert Opin Ther Targets 2013 17 839 55 23600530 
20 Wong EWP  Yan HHN  Li MWM    McQueen CAHoyer PB  Richburg JH   Cell junctions in the testis as targets for toxicants series editor Comprehensive toxicology 2010 Volume 11 Reproductive and Endocrine Toxicology 167 88 Academic Press, Elseiver Oxford 2nd edition  • An extensive update supporting the fact that Sertoli cell junction is the target of toxicants.


21 Byers S  Hadley MA  Djakiew D    Growth and characterization of epididymal epithelial cells and Sertoli cells in dual environment culture chambers J Androl 1986 7 59 68 3944021  • One of the first two reports in the literature using polarized Sertoli cell cultures for physiological studies.


22 Janecki A  Jakubowiak A  Steinberger A   Regulation of transepithelial electrical resistance in two-compartment Sertoli cell cultures: in vitro model of the blood-testis barrier Endocrinology 1991 129 1489 96 1908377  • One of the first two reports in the literature using polarized Sertoli cell cultures for physiological studies that mimic the blood-testis barrier in vivo.


23 
            Cheng CY  
            Mruk DD  
           The blood-testis barrier and its implication in male contraception Pharmacol Rev 2012 64 16 64 22039149 
24 Mruk DD  Cheng CY   An in vitro system to study Sertoli cell blood-testis barrier dynamics Methods Mol Biol 2011 763 237 52 21874456  •• A detailed account of using Sertoli cell cultures for studies of blood–testis barrier (BTB) function.


25 
            Wright W  
            Zabludoff S  
            Erickson-Lawrence M  
             
           Germ cell-Sertoli cell interactions. Studies of cyclic protein-2 in the seminiferous tubule Ann N Y Acad Sci 1989 564 173 85 2774415 
26 
            Johnson KJ  
            Heger NE  
            Boekelheide K  
           Of mice and men (and rats): phthalate-induced fetal testis endocrine disruption is species-dependent Toxicol Sci 2012 129 235 48 22700540 
27 Moroi S  Saitou M  Fujimoto K    Occludin is concentrated at tight junctions of mouse/rat but not human/guinea pig Sertoli cells in testes Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 1998 274 C1708 17  • This paper first reports that human Sertoli cells do not express occludin, illustrating species-specific expression of tight junction proteins that constitute the BTB.


28 
            Kaitu’u-Lino TJ  
            Sluka P  
            Foo CF  
             
           Claudin-11 expression and localisation is regulated by androgens in rat Sertoli cells in vitro Reproduction 2007 133 1169 79 17636171 
29 Ahmed EA  Barten-van Rijbroek AD  Kal HB    Proliferative activity in vitro and DNA repair indicate that adult mouse and human Sertoli cells are not terminally differentiated, quiescent cells Biol Reprod 2009 80 1084 91 19164176  •• The first study in the literature reporting that Sertoli cells isolated from post-pubertal rodents are not terminally differentiated in the presence of fetal calf serum.


30 Chui K  Trivedi A  Cheng CY    Characterization and functionality of proliferative human Sertoli cells Cell Transplant 2011 20 619 35 21054948  •• The first study that reports detailed protcols of using human Sertoli cells for physiological studies.


31 
            Hunt PA  
            Susiarjo M  
            Rubio C  
             
           The bisphenol A experience: A primer for the analysis of environmental effects on mammalian reproduction Biol Reprod 2009 81 807 13 19458313 
32 
            Chapin RE  
            Adams J  
            Boekelheide K  
             
           NTP-CERHR expert panel report on the reproductive and developmental toxicity of bisphenol A Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol 2008 83 157 395 18613034 
33 
            Hoekstra EJ  
            Simoneau C  
           Release of bisphenol A from polycarbonate: a review Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2013 53 386 402 23320909 
34 Vandenberg LN  Maffini MV  Sonnenschein C    Bisphenol-A and the great divide: A review of controversies in the field of endocrine disruption Endocr Rev 2009 30 75 95 19074586  • An extensive review on bisphenol A (BPA) and reproductive function.


35 
            Gao Y  
            Lee WM  
            Cheng CY  
           Thyroid hormone function in the rat testis Front Endocrinol 2014 5 188 
36 
            Nakhla AM  
            Mather JP  
            Janne OA  
             
           Estrogen and androgen receptors in Sertoli, Leydig, myoid, and epithelial cells: effects of time in culture and cell density Endocrinology 1984 115 121 8 6734511 
37 Li MWM  Mruk DD  Lee WM    Disruption of the blood-testis barrier integrity by bisphenol A in vitro: Is this a suitable model for studying blood-testis barrier dynamics? Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2009 41 2302 14 19497385  • The first report illustrating that BPA disrupts Sertoli cell BTB function in vitro and in vivo.


38 
            Salian S  
            Doshi T  
            Vanage G  
           Neonatal exposure of male rats to bisphenol A impairs fertility and expression of Sertoli cell junctional proteins in the testis Toxicology 2009 265 56 67 19782717 
39 
            Hengstler JG  
            Foth H  
            Gebel T  
             
           Critical evaluation of key evidence on the human health hazards of exposure to bisphenol A Crit Rev Toxicol 2011 41 263 91 21438738 
40 
            Dobrzynska MM  
            Jankowska-Steifer EA  
            Tyrkiel EJ  
             
           Comparison of the effecfts of bisphenol A alone and in a combination with X-irradiation on sperm count and quality in male adult and pubescent mice Environ Toxicol 2014 29 1301 13 23619965 
41 
            Thuillier R  
            Manku G  
            Wang Y  
             
           Changes in MAPK pathway in neonatal and adult testis following fetal estrogen exposure and effects on rat testicular cells Microsc Res Tech 2009 72 773 86 19565636 
42 
            Li MWM  
            Mruk DD  
            Lee WM  
             
           Connexin 43 is critical to maintain the homeostasis of blood-testis barrier via its effects on tight junction reassembly Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 107 17998 8003 20921394 
43 
            Izumi Y  
            Yamaguchi K  
            Ishikawa T  
             
           Molecular changes induced by bisphenol-A in rat Sertoli cell culture Syst Biol Reprod Med 2011 57 228 32 21574817 
44 
            Li MWM  
            Mruk DD  
            Cheng CY  
           Gap junctions and blood-tissue barriers Adv Exp Med Biol 2012 763 260 80 23397629 
45 Pointis G  Gilleron J  Carette D    Testicular connexin 43, a precocious molecular target for the effect of environmental toxicants on male fertility Spermatogenesis 2011 1 303 17 22332114  •• An excellent account of gap junction protein connexin 43 as a target of environmental toxicants.


46 
            Solan JL  
            Lampe PD  
           Specific Cx43 phosphorylation events regulate gap junciton turnoer in vivo FEBS Lett 2014 588 1423 9 24508467 
47 
            Dunn CA  
            Lampe PD  
           Injury-triggered Akt phosphorylation of Cx43: a ZO-1-driven molecular switch that regulates gap junction size J Cell Sci 2014 127 455 64 24213533 
48 
            Yogo K  
            Ogawa T  
            Akiyama M  
             
           Identification and functional analysis of novel phosphorylation sites in Cx43 in rat primary granulosa cells FEBS Lett 2002 531 132 6 12417300 
49 
            Lampe PD  
            TenBroek EM  
            Burt JM  
             
           Phosphorylation of connexin43 on serine368 by protein kinase C regulates gap junctional communications J Cell Biol 2000 149 1503 12 10871288 
50 
            Li MWM  
            Mruk DD  
            Lee WM  
             
           Connexin 43 and plakophilin-2 as a protein complex that regulates blood-testis barrier dynamics Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 106 10213 18 19509333 
51 
            Iida H  
            Maehara K  
            Doiguchi M  
             
           Bisphenol A-induced apoptosis of cultured rat Sertoli cells Reprod Toxicol 2003 17 457 64 12849858 
52 
            Qi S  
            Fu W  
            Wang C  
             
           BPA-induced apoptosis of rat Sertoli cells through Fas/FasL and JNKs/p38 MAPK pathways Reprod Toxicol 2014 50 108 16 25461909 
53 
            Wang C  
            Fu W  
            Quan C  
             
           The role of Pten/Akt signaling pathway involved in BPA-induced apoptosis of rat sertoli cells Environ Toxicol 2014 10.1002/tox.21958 
54 
            Qian W  
            Zhu J  
            Mao C  
             
           Involvement of CaM-CaMKII-ERK in bisphenol A-induced Sertoli cell apoptosis Toxicology 2014 324 27 34 24905940 
55 
            Urriola-Munoz P  
            Lagos-pCabre R  
            Moreno RD  
           A mechanism of male germ cell apoptosis induced by bisphenol-A and nonylphenol involving ADAM17 and p38 MAPK activation PLoS ONE 2014 9 e113793 25474107 
56 
            Lie PPY  
            Mruk DD  
            Mok KW  
             
           Focal adhesion kinase-Tyr407 and -Tyr397 exhibit antagonistic effects on blood-testis barrier dynamics in the rat Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012 109 12562 7 22797892 
57 
            Siu ER  
            Mruk DD  
            Porto CS  
             
           Cadmium-induced testicular injury Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2009 238 240 9 19236889 
58 
            Thompson J  
            Bannigan J  
           Cadmium: toxic effects on the reproductive system and the embryo Reprod Toxicol 2008 25 304 15 18367374 
59 
            Parizek J  
            Zahor Z  
           Effect of cadmium salts on testicular tissue Nature 1956 177 1036 7 13322022 
60 
            Wong CH  
            Mruk DD  
            Siu MKY  
             
           Blood-testis barrier dynamics are regulated by alpha2-macroglobulin via the c-Jun N-terminal protein kinase pathway Endocrinology 2005 146 1893 908 15618353 
61 
            Hew KW  
            Heath GL  
            Jiwa AH  
             
           Cadmium in vivo causes disruption of tight junction-associated microfilaments in rat Sertoli cells Biol Reprod 1993 49 840 9 8218650 
62 
            Lui WY  
            Lee WM  
            Cheng CY  
           Transforming growth factor-beta3 regulates the dynamics of Sertoli cell tight junctions via the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway Biol Reprod 2003 68 1597 612 12606350 
63 Lui WY  Wong CH  Mruk DD    TGF-beta3 regulates the blood-testis barrier dynamics via the p38 mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway: an in vivo study Endocrinology 2003 144 1139 42 12639893  •• The first in vivo study illustrating that cadmium’s exertion of its disruptive effects at the BTB is mediated by TGF-ß and p38 MAPK.


64 Wong CH  Mruk DD  Lui WY    Regulation of blood-testis barrier dynamics: an in vivo study J Cell Sci 2004 117 783 98 14734653  • This paper illustrates that cadmium-induced testis injury is mediated by well-defined signaling pathways.


65 
            Yu X  
            Hong S  
            Faustman EM  
           Cadmium-induced activation of stress signaling pathways, disruption of ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation and apoptosis in primary rat Sertoli cell-gonocyte cocultures Toxicol Sci 2008 104 385 96 18463101 
66 
            Wan HT  
            Mruk DD  
            Tang EI  
             
           Role of non-receptor protein tyrosine kinases in spermatid transport during spermatogenesis Semin Cell Dev Biol 2014 30 65 74 24727349 
67 
            Siu ER  
            Wong EWP  
            Mruk DD  
             
           Focal adhesion kinase is a blood-testis barrier regulator Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 106 9298 303 19470647 
68 
            Siu ER  
            Wong EWP  
            Mruk DD  
             
           An occludin-focal adhesion kinase protein complex at the blood-testis barrier: a study using the cadmium model Endocrinology 2009 150 3336 44 19213829 
69 
            Renner R  
           Growing concern over perfluorinated chemicals Environ Sci Technol 2001 35 154A 60A 
70 
            D’Hollander W  
            de Voogt P  
            De Coen W  
             
           Perfluorinated substances in human food and other sources of human exposure Rev Environ Contam Toxicol 2010 208 179 215 20811865 
71 
            Olsen GW  
            Burris JM  
            Ehresman DJ  
             
           Half-life of serum elimination of perfluorooctanesulfonate, perfluorohexanesulfonate, and perfluorooctanoate in retired fluorochemical production workers Environ Health Perspect 2007 115 1298 305 17805419 
72 
            Perez F  
            Nadal M  
            Navarro-Ortega A  
             
           Accumulation of perfluoroalkyl substances in human tissues Environ Int 2013 59 354 62 23892228 
73 
            Lau C  
            Anitole K  
            Hodes C  
             
           Perfluoroalkyl acids: a review of monitoring and toxicological findings Toxicol Sci 2007 99 366 94 17519394 
74 
            Joensen UN  
            Bossi R  
            Leffers H  
             
           Do perfluoroalkyl compounds impair human semen quality? Environ Health Perspect 2009 117 923 7 19590684 
75 
            La Rocca C  
            Alessi E  
            Bergamasco B  
             
           Exposure and effective dose biomarkers for perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in infertile subjects: preliminary results of the PREVIENI project Int J Hyg Environ Health 2012 215 206 11 22197512 
76 Wan HT  Mruk DD  Wong CKC    Perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS) perturbs male rat Sertoli cell blood-testis barrier function by affecting F-actin organization via p-FAK-Tyr407 - an in vitro study Endocrinology 2014 155 249 62 24169556  • A functional mechanistic study unraveling the molecular mechanism by which perfluorooctane sulfonate induces Sertoli cell injurty.


77 
            Zhang J  
            Liang J  
            Zhu H  
             
           PFOS and PCB 153 have direct adverse effects on neonatal testis modeled using a coculture of primary gonocyte and Sertoli cells Environ Toxicol 2013 28 322 31 21544924 
78 
            Qiu L  
            Zhang X  
            Zhang X  
             
           Sertoli cell is a potential target for perfluorooctane sulfonate-induced reproductive dysfunction in male mice Toxicol Sci 2013 135 229 40 23761298 
79 
            Aravindakshan J  
            Cyr DG  
           Nonylphenol alters connextin 43 levels and connexin 43 phosphorylation via an inhibition of the p38-mitogen-actived protein kinase pathway Biol Reprod 2005 72 1232 40 15647452 
80 
            Kaur G  
            Dufour JM  
           Cell lines. Valuable tools or useless artifacts Spermatogenesis 2012 2 1 5 22553484 
81 
            Calalb MB  
            Polte TR  
            Hanks SK  
           Tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates kinase activity: a role for Src family kinases Mol Cell Biol 1995 15 954 63 7529876 
82 
            Schlaepfer DD  
            Hunter T  
           Evidence for in vivo phosphorylation of the Grb2 SH2-domain binding site on focal adhesion kinase by Src-family protein-tyrosine kinases Mol Cell Biol 1996 16 5623 33 8816475 
83 
            Mruk DD  
            Su L  
            Cheng CY  
           Emerging role for drug transporters at the blood-testis barrier Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011 32 99 106 21168226 
84 
            Su L  
            Mruk DD  
            Cheng CY  
           Regulation of drug transporters in the testis by environmental toxicant cadmium, steroids and cytokines Spermatogenesis 2012 2 285 93 23248770 
85 
            Cheng CY  
           Toxicants target cell junctions in the testis - insights from the indazole-carboxylic acid model Spermatogenesis 2014 4 2 e981485 26413399 
86 
            Su L  
            Mruk DD  
            Lui WY  
             
           P-glycoprotein regulates blood-testis barrier dynamics via its effects on the occludin/zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) protein complex mediated by focal adhesion kinase (FAK) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108 19623 8 22106313 
87 
            Su L  
            Mruk DD  
            Lee WM  
             
           Drug transporters and blood-testis barrier function J Endocrinol 2011 209 337 51 21471187 
88 Dalton TP  He L  Wang B    Identification of mouse SLC39A8 as the transporter responsible for cadmium-induced toxicity in the testis Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005 102 3401 6 15722412  • An important report demonstrating the role of a cadmium transporter in mediating cadmium toxicity in the mouse testis.


89 
            Popovic M  
            Zaja R  
            Fent K  
             
           Interaction of environmental contaminants with zebrafish organic anion transporting polypeptide, Oatp1d1 (Slco1d1) Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2014 280 149 58 25088042 
90 
            Qian X  
            Mruk DD  
            Cheng YH  
             
           Actin binding proteins, spermatid transport and spermiation Semin Cell Dev Biol 2014 30 75 85 24735648 
91 Tang EI  Mruk DD  Lee WM    Ebnet K   Cell-cell interactions, cell polarity, and the blood-testis barrier Cell polarity 2015 303 26 Springer International Publishing Geneva 1st Edition  • A detailed account of the microtubule-based cytoskeleton in the testis.


92 
            Tang EI  
            Mruk DD  
            Cheng CY  
           MAP/microtubule affinity-regulating kinases, microtubule dynamics, and spermatogenesis J Endocrinol 2013 217 R13 23 23449618 
93 
            Tang EI  
            Xiao X  
            Mruk DD  
             
           Microtubule affinity-regulated kinase 4 (MARK4) is a component of the ectoplasmic specialization in the rat testis Spermatogenesis 2012 2 117 26 22670221 
94 Wong EWP  Mruk DD  Lee WM    Par3/Par6 polarity complex coordinates apical ectoplasmic specialization and blood-testis barrier restructuring during spermatogenesis Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008 105 9657 62 18621709  • The first report in the literature regarding the role of polarity proteins in spermatogenesis using adjudin as a study model.


95 Lie PPY  Chan AYN  Mruk DD    Restricted Arp3 expression in the testis prevents blood-testis barrier disruption during junction restructuring at spermatogenesis Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010 107 11411 16 20534520  • The first functional study illustrating the role of branched actin polymerization protein Arp3 in the testis.


96 
            Lie PPY  
            Mruk DD  
            Lee WM  
             
           Epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 8 (Eps8) is a novel regulator of cell adhesion and the blood-testis barrier integrity in the seminiferous epithelium FASEB J 2009 23 2555 67 19293393 
97 
            Qian X  
            Mruk DD  
            Wong EWP  
             
           Palladin is a regulator of actin filament bundles at the ectoplasmic specialization in the rat testis Endocrinology 2013 154 1907 20 23546604 
98 
            Gungor-Ordueri NE  
            Celik-Ozenci C  
            Cheng CY  
           Fascin 1 is an actin filament-bundling protein that regulates ectoplasmic specialization dynamics in the rat testis Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2014 307 E738 E53 25159326 
99 
            Cheng CY  
            Lie PPY  
            Wong EWP  
             
           Adjudin disrupts spermatogenesis via the action of some unlikely partners: Eps8, Arp2/3 complex, drebrin E, PAR6 and 14-3-3 Spermatogenesis 2011 1 291 7 22332112 
100 
            Wan HT  
            Mruk DD  
            Li SYT  
             
           p-FAK-Tyr397 regulates spermatid adhesion in the rat testis via its effects on F-actin organization at the ectoplasmic specialization Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2013 305 E687 E99 23880313 
101 Siu MKY  Mruk DD  Lee WM    Adhering junction dynamics in the testis are regulated by an interplay of beta1-integrin and focal adhesion complex (FAC)-associated proteins Endocrinology 2003 144 2141 63 12697723  • The first report in the literature illustrating that focal adhesion kinase is a cell–cell anchoring junction component in the testis at the Sertoli–Sertoli and Sertoli–spermatid interface.


102 Beardsley A  Robertson DM  O’Donnell L   A complex containing alpha6beta1-integrin and phosphorylated focal adhesion kinase between Sertoli cells and elongated spermatids during spermatid release from the seminiferous epithelium J Endocrinol 2006 190 759 70 17003277  • An excellent report illustrating the role of FAK in spermatid adhesion in the rodent testis.


103 
            Zhang J  
            Liang J  
            Zhu H  
             
           PFOS and PCB 153 have direct adverse effects on neonatal testis modeled using a coculture of primary gonocyte and sertoli cells Environ Toxicol 2013 28 322 31 21544924 
104 
            Fiorini C  
            Tilloy-Ellul A  
            Chevalier S  
             
           Sertoli cell junctional proteins as early targets for different classes of reproductive toxicants Reprod Toxicol 2004 18 413 21 15082077 
105 
            Yu X  
            Hong S  
            Faustman EM  
           Cadmium-induced activation of stress signaling pathways, disruption of ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation and apoptosis in primary rat Sertoli cell-gonocyte cocultures Toxicol Sci 2008 385 96 18463101 

