LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   82192325883Neurol ClinNeurol ClinNeurologic clinics0733-86191557-987526515629471262710.1016/j.ncl.2015.07.008NIHMS747254ArticleComplementary and Alternative Therapies in ALS Bedlack Richard S. MD, PhD1Joyce Nanette DO2Carter Gregory T. MD, MS3Pagononi Sabrina MD, PhD4Karam Chafic MD51 Duke University Department of Neurology and Durham VA Medical Center, Durham NC2 University of California, Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento CA3 St. Luke’s Rehabilitation Institute, Spokane WA4 Harvard Medical School, Neurological Clinical Research Institute, Boston MA5 University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill NCCorresponding Author: Richard Bedlack, Duke University ALS Clinic, Box 3333, Durham NC 27702, Phone: 919 668-2839, Fax: 919 668-2901, Bedla001@mc.duke26 12 2015 08 9 2015 11 2015 14 1 2016 33 4 909 936 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Synopsis
Given the severity of their illness and lack of effective disease modifying agents, it is not surprising that most patients with ALS consider trying complementary and alternative therapies. Some of the most commonly considered alternative therapies include special diets, nutritional supplements, cannabis, acupuncture, chelation and energy healing. This chapter reviews these in detail. We also describe 3 models by which physicians may frame discussions about alternative therapies: paternalism, autonomy and shared decision making. Finally, we review a program called ALSUntangled which using shared shared decision making to review alternative therapies for ALS.

Complementary and Alternative MedicinePaternalismAutonomy
   I. Introduction
Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is defined as non-mainstream treatment used in addition to (complementary) or instead of (alternative) standard evidence-based care (1). At some point in their illness, the majority of people with ALS (PALS) will try at least one type of CAM (2,3). It is easy to see why. ALS rapidly disables and shortens the lifespan of its victims. While symptom management has improved in recent years (4–6) there remains no evidence-based clinically meaningful disease-modifying therapy for this dreaded condition. Surveys shed light on patient motivations and expectations for ALS CAMs: 10% believe they will find a cure, 30% believe they will improve, 50% believe they will slow progression (2,3). Other drivers we have encountered include peer pressure from family members and friends who have these expectations, and the belief that nothing worse than the present disease could possibly be encountered.

The Internet has made it easier than ever for PALS to find CAMs. A Google search of “ALS Treatment” for example, yields more than 100 million hits (7). While this breadth is impressive, there is often little depth within websites offering CAMs. Claims such as “clinically proven”, and “perfectly safe” are too-often supported by data that ranges from absent, to flawed, to completely inaccurate. Real harms have come to PALS pursuing CAMs, including physical, financial, and psychological harms (8,9). There is also the potential for scientific harms, as pursuit of CAM is sometimes undertaken in place of enrollment in a trial, meaning trials may take longer, cost more and have to be stopped prematurely due to poor enrollment (10).

In this chapter we will describe the types of ALS CAMs that we have been asked about most often over the years. We will then discuss options for reviewing CAMs with PALS, including one called ALSUntangled.

II. Types of CAM that PALS Commonly Ask About
A. Diets and Nutritional Supplements
The importance of energy balance is well established in ALS, with both pre-clinical and human studies offering evidence to support a disease influencing effect of premorbid weight, weight maintenance and caloric intake (11–13). While studies in the healthy population suggest that reduced caloric intake provides survival benefits by reducing the risk for chronic disease, the opposite is true in ALS. ALS SOD1-mutant mice placed on a calorie-restricted diet showed reduced paw-grip strength and significantly reduced survival compared to animals receiving adequate nutrition (14). In contrast, several studies examining the effects of high calorie diets enriched in carbohydrates or fat have shown prolonged survival in SOD1 animals (15–18).

Evidence supporting a survival benefit related to energy balance in ALS patients has been collected primarily from population studies that include assessment of BMI and malnutrition. Malnutrition in ALS has been defined as the loss of greater than 10% baseline body weight or a body mass index (BMI) lower than 18.5 kg/m2; both are considered negative predictors of survival in ALS. While the prevalence varies between studies, some report over half of all ALS patients meet criteria for malnutrition (19). The literature consistently shows that a higher BMI, between 30 to 35 kg/m2, is associated with decreased risk of disease, later disease onset and prolonged survival (20). Low BMI or rapid weight loss negatively effects disease progression with reports suggesting a 7.7 fold relative risk of mortality in malnourished ALS patients (21). In addition, Lindauer et al. in their prospective study, assessing adiposity by MRI imaging, reported that increased subcutaneous fat mass was a statistically significant predictor of survival in men (22).

Weight loss is nearly ubiquitous in ALS and presents significant challenges for patients. In a cohort of 121 patients, queried by Korner et al., weight loss had a negative impact on quality of life with perception of reduced physical functioning and vitality. Patients who had lost weight and were subsequently placed on high calorie supplements or had undergone PEG (n = 23) reported weight stabilization or gain. Of those who chose PEG, 84.6% reported an improvement in QOL with no patients reporting worsened QOL (23). The etiology of weight loss and subsequent malnutrition in ALS is multifactorial and includes dysphagia from bulbar dysfunction, upper extremity weakness, and hypermetabolism. Dysphagia is present in 45% of patients with bulbar onset disease at diagnosis, and approximately 81% of all ALS patients will experience dysphagia as a symptom of ALS (23). Due to the involvement of cranial nerves IX, X and XII, patients with bulbar disease develop disruption in tongue, pharyngeal and esophageal function resulting in difficulty chewing and swallowing. The weakened oral activities ultimately result in reduced calorie and fluid intake as patients often become fearful of choking and avoid eating and drinking, or are unable to spend the increased time it takes to consume a meal safely. Upper extremity weakness also interferes with weight maintenance as it impairs self-feeding and prolongs mealtime, which often results in early satiety and reduced caloric intake. Dietary modification, with changes in food texture and liquid viscosity, as well as behavioral modification, including safe swallowing techniques and caregiver assisted feeding, may help mitigate these problems, at least temporarily.

Hypermetabolism, defined as an increased resting metabolic rate, has been observed in ALS patients and SOD1 mice. The etiology of the hypermetabolism in ALS is poorly described, but has been attributed to increased energy utilization by weakened skeletal muscles; nonfunctional muscular activity such as spasticity, cramps, fasciculations, and/or pseudobulbar motor activities (uncontrolled laughing or crying); and the metabolic cost of increased protein catabolism (24,25). Calculating the total daily energy expenditure for ALS patients using standard methods such as the Harris-Benedict Equation does not provide adequate estimation of total daily energy expenditure. It has been suggested that ALS patients require anywhere from 10–20% more calories than what these predication strategies indicate. Kasarskis et.al. followed 80 individuals with ALS and their data provided evidence supporting the presence of hypermetabolism early in disease and the potential for broad fluctuation of energy imbalance within a single ALS patient (−2989 to +1395 kcal/d), illustrating the complexity of metabolic changes in ALS. This presents a challenge to the practitioner for providing accurate estimates and recommendations to meet each patient’s nutritional needs over the course of disease. From their data, the authors (26) developed a more accurate caloric estimation tool using the ALSFRSr and the Harris-Benedict Equation; both patients and practitioners can access this tool online and use it to guide nutrition related interventions including the need for gastrostomy (27).

There have been conflicting opinions regarding the best diet to recommend for nutritional support in ALS. Some propose a diet high in carbohydrates while others recommend a diet high in fat. Still others hypothesize that a ketogenic diet may have therapeutic potential in ALS based on preclinical data in SOD1 mice showing strength gains mid-disease when compared to mice fed a traditional diet (28). While high calorie diets have shown survival benefit in SOD1 mice, the ketogenic diet did not. In a recent clinical trial, comparing the potential of high calorie diets enriched with either fat or carbohydrates to restore weight in 24 individuals with ALS, both strategies were reported as safe and effective after 12 weeks of treatment (29). However, there was a trend toward greater weight gain that did not reach statistical significance for those who consumed the high fat diet. This study was limited by small sample size and no conclusion could be drawn about survival, as this was not an end point. In contrast, a second small but randomized, double blind, placebo controlled phase II clinical study (n=24) compared the safety and tolerability of three diets; a regular diet (jevity 1.00; 29% fat calories), a hypercarbohydrate hypercaloric diet (Jevity 1.5; 29% fat calories), and a hyperfat hypercaloric diet (Oxepa; 55% fat calories with eicosapentaenoic acid and gamma-linolenic acid) with differing results (30). While this study was also limited by sample size, the data favored those who were treated with the hypercarbohydrate hypercaloric diet, who had fewer serious adverse events including death during the 5 month follow-up period (control deaths 3 of 7; HF/HC deaths 1 of 8; HC/HC deaths 0 of 9). Interestingly, the hyperfat hypercaloric cohort lost weight during the trial calling into question the accuracy of their methods for assessing calorie requirements. In addition, preclinical data assessing the benefits of omega 3 fatty acids, and more specifically eicosapentaenoic acid, in ALS SOD1 mice showed reduced survival in the animals receiving the omega 3 fatty acid (31). The authors cautioned against its use in ALS. Further testing with a larger sample, and perhaps using a different hyperfat hypercaloric supplement is needed. However, there appears to be sufficient data to conclude that a diet high in calories provides benefit in ALS.

When ALS patients are unable to overcome negative energy balance and lose more than 10 percent of baseline body weight a gastrostomy tube is often indicated. Argued advantages of gastrostomy include alleviation of patient and family stress, improvement in quality of life and increased survival. While this has remained somewhat controversial, there is a growing body of evidence to support these benefits. Numerous studies have measured mortality rate post procedure with respiratory insufficiency being the most common cause of peri-procedural death. The AAN recommends that gastrostomy be placed when the force vital capacity is equal to or greater than 50% predicted to reduce associated risks (32). A study of 35 ALS patients with FVC greater than 50%, observed in three month intervals post PEG tube placement for up to 2 years, did not differ significantly in mortality from patients without PEG at 6 months, but did after 6 months, having lower mortality and significant improvement in BMI (33). Intra-procedural mortality of percutaneous gastrostomy has been shown to be 1.8%, 24-hour in-hospital mortality rate 3.6%, and 30-day mortality rate 11.5% (34). More recently, Dorst et al. followed 89 patients in a multi-center prospective study observing the safety of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG). They reported general safety of PEG placement with only 1.1% mortality in the peri-procedure period. In addition they had improved outcomes in patients receiving, single prophylactic injection of antibiotics during tube placement, slow initiation of nutritional supplementation (&lt;200 kcal/day), and high calorie nutritional supplementation once at goal (35). There were no reports of refeeding syndrome and the patients who received high calorie supplementation showed a survival benefit at 18 months post gastrostomy placement. In addition, the authors concluded that the use of non-invasive ventilation in the peri-procedure period decreased the risk associated with PEG, allowing safe placement later in disease. However, some suggest that radiologically placed gastrostomy (RIG) is safer than PEG (36).

If nutrition has such a strong influence on disease onset and progression, are there disease-modifying effects of vitamin and mineral enriched diets? Supplements or “nutraceuticals” are ” products intended to supplement the diet that contain one or more of the following dietary ingredients: a vitamin; a mineral; an herb or other botanical; or an amino acid used as a dietary substance for man to supplement the diet by increasing the total dietary intake to promote wellness (37).” Since the passing of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 supplements have not been regulated by the FDA and are widely available and easily obtained without physician oversight. In fact, there are few requirements, other than registering the manufacturing plant and following rules for labeling, that manufacturers have to meet to produce supplements or ensure product quality and safety. It is estimated that over 50% of United States citizens take supplements regularly for health. The prevalence of supplement users is even greater in the ALS community, with more than 75% of patients taking supplements as part of their health regimen (32,38). In the setting of a terminal disease without ample choices for disease-modifying therapies, these patients assert their autonomy and report that they self-medicate with dietary supplements to improve general wellbeing and slow disease progression (3). Importantly, as described in a study of 121 ALS patients, those who took supplements (52%) reported greater vitality, physical and social functioning, and an overall improved quality of life (QoL) in the early and mid-stages of disease (23). Whether this benefit was afforded or not by the physiologic effects of the supplements can be debated; however the health benefit, as measured by QoL, of a self-determined choice should not be considered trivial and may be tightly bound to a patient’s hope for improved health and prolonged life. While the vast majority of supplements have little or no supporting scientific evidence to back their use, patients will take them. Rosenthal and Ellis in their review of nutrition and dietary supplements for motor neuron disease, suggest that it is the responsibility of the practitioner to remain aware of known adverse effects and “offer advice or caution as our patients explore their own therapeutic combinations (39).”

The Deanna Protocol is a supplement regimen that many PALS currently ask about. It was developed by an orthopedic physician who became frustrated by the lack of effective disease-modifying treatments when his daughter was first diagnosed with ALS (40). The regimen combines multiple supplements targeted to improve mitochondrial function and cellular energy production, and to provide neuroprotection. The exact regimen itself changes; the most recent version can be found on the “Winning the Fight” website (41). This website reports “Scientific studies have proven that the Deanna Protocol significantly slows the progression of ALS and extends life span (41).” We are aware of only 1 published study on the Deanna Protocol, and this was done in animals. Poff and colleagues compared standard and ketogenic diets, both with and without added key supplements from the Deanna Protocol in SOD1 mutant mice (42). Their data demonstrated significant improvements in function mid-disease, and prolonged longevity in animals fed both the supplemented diets compared to the non-supplemented diets. Furthermore, the supplement enriched standard diet provided the longest and most statistically significant survival benefit (7.5% increase; p=0.001), while the mice fed the supplement enriched ketogenic diet showed the earliest functional benefit with a shorter but still significant increase in survival (4.2% increase; p=0.006). This animal study has multiple methodological flaws identified by published guidelines (43) and has not been independently replicated. There are anecdotal reports of patients having improved energy and slowed progression on the Deanna Protocol, but neither the ALS diagnosis nor the reported improvements could be independently validated (40). The cost to obtain the entire supplement list from one version of the protocol has been estimated to be greater than $400.00 per month and is not reimbursable by insurance (40). Further investigations are warranted to evaluate its efficacy.

Although limited, both pre-clinical and clinical studies have been completed for various nutritional supplements in ALS. Below is a select list of supplements, most with antioxidant properties, that have been proposed as potentially beneficial for the ALS Patient.

Catechins
Catechins are polyphenolic flavonoids which possess strong antioxident properties and include, epigallocatechin, epicatechin, and epicatichin-3-gallate. Catechins are considered free radical scavengers found in high concentrations in some plants, fruits and vegetables. They are considered the health promoting constituent of green tea, blue berries, cocoa, prune juice, red wine, and Ginko Baloba to name a few. Studies have shown that catechins cross the blood brain barrier and are incorporated into brain tissue where they exert potent neuroprotective actions by modulating mitochondrial responses to oxidative insults. Clinical studies in Parkinson’s disease have had promising results, however, no clinical studies have been completed in ALS. Supporting biologic plausibility for catechins in the treatment of ALS, in vitro studies revealed that epicatichin-3-gallate reduced hyperexcitability in SOD1 motor neurons by interfering with glutamate hyperexcitability, and had a rescue effect in motor neurons exposed to H2O2 (44). Preclinical investigation in the G93A SOD1 mouse showed that pre-symptomatic oral administration of epicatichin-3-gallate significantly delayed the onset of disease, and extended life span. In addition, the treated mice had increased number of motor neurons, diminished microglial activation, reduced immunohistochemical reaction of NF-kappaB and cleaved caspase-3 as well as reduced protein levels of iNOS and NF-kappaB in the spinal cords.

Co-Q10
Co-enzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is a fat soluble vitamin-like substance found in mitochondria, that is part of the electron transport chain, participating in aerobic cellular respiration and the generation of ATP. Both pre-clinical and clinic studies have been completed assessing CoQ10 in ALS. SOD1 transgenic mice, fed daily CoQ10, demonstrated an increase in survival by 6 days compared to controls, which met modest statistical significance (45). Although high doses of up to 3000mg/day were well tolerated in patients (46), a phase II clinical trial did not confirm superiority of CoQ10 when compared to patients taking placebo (47). Advancement to a phase III clinical trial was not recommended.

Creatine
Creatine is a nitrogenous organic acid that participates in cellular energy production. In addition, creatine appears to have neuroprotective properties related to its role in stabilizing the mitochondrial membrane by suppressing the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore and release of cellular pro apoptotic factors (48). In ALS, supplementation with creatine was found to improve motor performance, improve weight maintenance and extend survival in G93A transgenic mice (49). However, a second group showed no effect of creatine on muscle bulk and strength in SOD1 mice (50). A randomized double-blind, placebo controlled trial in humans, did not show significant benefits (51,52). A recent Cochrane review, including 3 trials and 386 ALS participants taking creatine, by Bedlack et al, concluded that “in patients already diagnosed with clinically probable or definite ALS, creatine at doses ranging from 5 to 10 g per day did not have a statistically significant effect on survival, ALSFRS-R progression or percent predicted FVC progression (53).” However, it is unknown if, at higher doses, creatine may be beneficial to PALS (54). Interestingly, a recent phase II study showed that high dose creatine supplementation is safe, tolerable, and may have some positive effects in Huntington Disease. We await further studies with high dose creatine in ALS patients to determine whether it is beneficial.

Ibedenone
Idebenone is quinone anologue of CoQ10 that was developed in Japan in the 1980’s for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. Idebenone is an antioxidant that has been shown to inhibit lipid peroxidation in brain mitochondria. In one series, Idebenone was the most potent antioxidant of 70 related quinones evaluated (55). Idebenone has been most extensively evaluated in patients with Friedreich’s ataxia, a trinucleotide repeat disorder with impaired iron metabolism and redox homeostasis (56). The result of multiple clinical trials in this patient population have been mixed ranging from documented improvement in function to lack of efficacy (56,57). While there are concerns that Idebenone has the potential to form superoxide radicals causing increased cellular damage, it was well tolerated in all clinical studies and was subsequently marketed in Canada. However, in 2013, Santhera Pharmaceuticals voluntarily pulled it from market, citing lack of efficacy (57). Idebenone continues to be available online through neutraceutical providers, and is included as one of the key supplements in the Deanna Protocol. While clinical trials are ongoing in multiple sclerosis and other neuromuscular diseases, no preclinical or clinical studies have been published in ALS.

L-Carnitine
An essential cofactor for the beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids, L-carnitine is a quaternary ammonium compound required for the transport of fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix for use in energy metabolism. Its antioxidant properties include superoxide anion radical and hydrogen scavenging that reduces mitochondrial injury and apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo (58). In transgenic mice carrying a human SOD1 gene, oral L-carnitine significantly delayed the onset of signs of disease, delayed deterioration of motor activity, and extended life span (59). Furthermore, subcutaneous injection prolonged survival even when treatment was initiated after the onset of symptoms (59). A small (n=42 treated, 40 placebo) randomized double-blind placebo-controlled pilot study of acetyl-L-carnitine, showed an increase in median survival and slower ALSFRS-R and FVC decline in the patients taking L-carnitine 3g/day. No significant side effects were reported and the authors concluded that a phase III trial is needed to confirm these preliminary findings (60).

Omega-3
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids have been associated with significant health benefits (61). Omega 3 is thought to reduce neuroexcitotoxicity and neuroinflammation, and activate anti-apoptotic pathways (62). In a study combing the data from 5 large prospective cohorts, there was an associated reduced risk for developing ALS in those consuming a diet high in omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (63). A single preclinical study has been completed in transgenic SOD1 mice to evaluate disease-modifying effects of omega 3 (64). They fed the mice a diet high in eicosapentaenoic acid, a murine derived omega 3 fatty acid. Omega 3 did not affect the course of motor deficit or the length of survival, whether administered at disease onset or if given during the symptomatic stage of the disease, and accelerated disease progression in those fed omega-3 during the pre-symptomatic stage of ALS. Those animals fed omega 3 fatty acids showed an increase in vacuolization of anterior horn cells and associated glial cells abnormalities. In their conclusion, the authors advised against the use of omega-3 supplementation in patients with ALS (64). While there have been no clinical trials directly assessing the efficacy of a diet high in omega 3 fatty acids, a small clinical trial discussed earlier in this chapter, did compare a standard diet, high carbohydrate diet and a high fat diet with 55% of its calories provided by omega 3 fatty acids. The high fat diet had increased adverse events including deaths, as compared to the high carbohydrate diet (29,30).

Resveratrol
Resveratrol is a polyphenol found in the skin of grapes, blueberries, raspberries and mulberries. It is reported to have neuroprotective effects through cellular pathways affecting mitochondrial biogenesis and autophagy, with implicated pathways activating Surtuins, AMPK and PGC-1alpha. A few pre-clinical studies have been completed studying the effects of Resveratrol (65–67). All studies reported a delay in disease onset and statistically significant increases in survival. In addition, Resveratrol improved survival with post disease onset treatment in the SOD1 ALS mouse model (65–67). Over 30 clinical trials have been conducted examining the effects of Resveratrol in cancer, diabetes and heart disease, to name a few (68). The supplement has had varying affects but has been well tolerated in all the studies. There have been no clinical trials in patients with ALS.

Vitamin A
Vitamin A is a fat soluble vitamin with multiple functions including growth and development, vision, and maintenance of the immune system. While some authors have suggested that retinoid signaling is altered in ALS, serum vitamin A levels have been evaluated and have not differed from controls (69). A pre-clinical investigation using transgenic ALS mice, demonstrated shortened lifespan in mice receiving daily retinoic acid supplementation. The authors cautioned against its use in ALS (70). There have been no human clinical trials assessing the efficacy of retinoic acid.

Homocysteine
Homocysteine is involved in the formation of free radicals and cytosolic calcium accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, apoptotic pathway activation, and excitotoxic amino acid–mediated damage (71). These pathological pathways have been implicated in ALS. A small clinical study found that plasma homocysteine levels are increased in PALS compared with healthy controls. PALS with shorter time to diagnosis were found to have higher homocysteine levels. The authors concluded that a higher plasma homocysteine may be linked to faster progression of the disease (72). Another small study showed that homocysteine level in the cerebrospinal fluid is also increased in patients with ALS compared to healthy controls. The authors hypothesized that homocysteine may be a biomarker of ALS and may be involved in the pathophysiology (73). Folate and vitamin B12 are thought to reduce the level of homocysteine via remethylation. Studies using SOD1 mouse models have shown a beneficial effect of folate on reducing the levels of homocysteine, delaying onset of disease and prolonging lifespan (74). However, in one study, B12 alone did not show any effect on homocysteine levels, onset of disease or survival. However, a more recent in vitro study had opposite results, showing better survival against homocysteine toxicity in vitro, in cells pretreated with B12 but not in those treated with folate (75). Furthermore, in one small pre-clinical study, ALS mice were supplemented with Galactooligosaccharides (GOS), a prebiotic that is thought to improve the absorption and synthesis of B Vitamins. GOS and prebiotics yogurt administration were shown to significantly delay the disease onset and prolong the lifespan in SOD1G93A mice. Also, these products increased the concentration of folate and VitB12, and reduced the level of homocysteine (76). However, there have been no clinical trials examining the role of B12, folate or GOS supplementation in ALS.

Thiamine
Thiamin-thiamin monophosphate (T/T TMP) ratio has been shown to be reduced in the CSF of PALS in 2 small studies. There have been no studies evaluating supplementation with thiamin (vitamin B1) in PALS (77,78).

Riboflavin
Riboflavin or vitamin B2 supplementation was evaluated in one pre-clinical study using the SOD1 transgenic mouse model. There was no significant effect of riboflavin on either survival or motor performance (79).

Vitamin C
Vitamin C is considered an antioxidant but several studies have failed to show an association between vitamin C intake and ALS progression (80). There have been no ALS clinical trials addressing vitamin C supplementation.

Vitamin D
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble secosteroid. Sources of vitamin D include direct skin exposure to sunlight, few foods, and dietary supplements. Skin exposure to ultraviolet B radiation from the sun provides the predominant source of vitamin D. After hydroxylation in the liver and kidney to 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D respectively, the active metabolite binds to the vitamin D-receptor in a cell, and induces transcription of a responsive gene. The vitamin D receptor has been found in many tissues including motor neurons, bone and muscle cells suggesting wide physiologic influence. Vitamin D participates in several distinct pathways that are potentially important in ALS physiopathology including calcium regulation and potentiation of protective neurotrophic factors (81). In a retrospective study of 74 ALS patients, risk of death was significantly increased in those with severe vitamin D deficiency (&lt;25 nmol/L) compared to patients with normal vitamin D (82). The authors concluded that serum vitamin D may be a reliable prognostic indicator (82). Supplementation with vitamin D in ALS mouse models has yielded mixed results (83–85). A small clinical study showed that patients with ALS tended to have low vitamin D levels and that oral vitamin D supplementation with 2000 I.U./day was safe and may be of benefit (86). Screening for 25-OH vitamin D deficiency and providing vitamin D3 supplementation for those who are deficient is reasonable (87).

Vitamin E
Vitamin E is a fat soluble antioxidant comprised of tocopherols and tocotrienols. Studies in transgenic mice have shown that vitamin E can delay the onset of ALS but does not affect survival (88). Randomized trials of vitamin E supplementation did not prove efficacy (89,90). Interestingly, vitamin E intake may reduce the risk of developing ALS (91). Patients who chose to augment their vitamin E by supplementation should be cautioned that hypervitaminosis E can increase the risk of bleeding.

B. Cannabis
There is a growing body of evidence that that cannabinoids (the active ingredient in cannabis) may hold a significant therapeutic benefit for patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Moreover, through manipulation of the endocannabinoid system, cannabis may hold disease-modifying potential in ALS (92–105). There are a number of animal studies suggest that the endocannabinoid system is implicated in the pathophysiology of ALS (93–99). This may be through a direct action or disease mechanism. Conversely this may be as part of a failure of homeostatic functioning of the neuromuscular system that may be governed by this system. There is now good animal based evidence that that cannabinoids are capable of slowing disease progression of ALS in mice (93–96). The mechanisms are not entirely clear but it is likely this occurs partially by cannabinoids acting as anti-oxidants and neuromodulators, although other mechanisms are likely as well.

Cannabis has also been reported to be useful in managing the symptomatology in ALS (104). There are many symptoms of the disease, including pain, spasticity, loss of appetite, depression, and management of saliva that could be helped by cannabis use. In a survey of 131 patients with ALS, those who were able to obtain cannabis found it preferable to prescription medication in managing their symptoms (104). However, this study also noted that the biggest reason ALS patients were not using cannabis was their inability to obtain it, either due to legal or financial reasons or lack of safe access (104).

Thus there could be a potential dual role of cannabis for both clinical symptom management and a positive disease-modifying effect. There are both physiological and pharmacological mechanisms identified to support these roles. The basic mechanism of action for cannabis is the endocannabinoid system. Our understanding of the receptors and ligands composing the endogenous cannabinoid system has increased tremendously over the past few decades (106–111). There are now identified 2 major cannabinoid receptor subtypes (111,112). The type 1 (CB1) cannabinoid receptor is predominantly expressed in the central nervous system (CNS), while the type 2 (CB2) receptor is primarily found in the peripheral nervous system (PNS), immune system, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems, among others.

Biochemistry of the Cannabis Plant
The cannabis plant is complex, with several types of subtypes of cannabis, each containing over 400 chemical moieties (113,114). Approximately 60 are chemically classified as cannabinoids (114). The cannabinoids are 21 carbon terpenes, biosynthesized predominantly via a recently discovered deoxyxylulose phosphate pathway (115). The molecular mechanism of action of the cannabinoids became much more clear with the characterization and cloning of the CB1 and CB2 receptors. Interestingly while these receptors appear to mediate most of the pharmacological actions of cannabis, there may be other orphan receptors for plant based cannabinoids (phytocannabinoids)(115,17). There are other natural plant based compounds, including flavonoids, which are structurally similar to phytocannabinoids. Over the last decade, a number of potential alternative receptors for phytocannabinoids have been suggested, based on ligand binding studies. This may also extend to the endocannabinoids, and possibly even synthetic cannabinergic drugs (116). The most recent data on these emerging “non-CB1, non-CB2 receptors cannabinoid receptors” suggests that there are still many uncharacterized or “orphan” endocannabinoid mediated G-protein-coupled receptors that have yet to be fully delineated. Moreover there are likely a whole host of cannabis plant based terpenoids that may hold therapeutic promise, including compounds such as limonene and myrcene. (118). Terpenoids share a precursor with phytocannabinoids, but display unique therapeutic effects that may contribute meaningfully to the entourage effects of cannabis-based medicinal extracts. There continues to be growing evidence that these non-cannabinoid components from the cannabis plant may have tremendous therapeutic potential for disease such as ALS, without any intoxicating effects (118).

The cannabinoids themselves are all lipophilic and not soluble in water. Among the most psychoactive of the cannabinoids is delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active ingredient in dronabinol (119). This is the primary intoxicant in cannabis. Other major cannabinoids include cannabidiol (CBD) and cannabinol (CBN), both of which may modify the pharmacology of THC or have distinct effects of their own (120). CBD is not psychoactive but has significant anticonvulsant, sedative, and other pharmacological activity likely to interact with THC (121–125).

Clinical Uses Cannabis in Patients with ALS
The cannabinoids found in cannabis have many pharmacological mechanisms of action that can be immediately useful to help manage clinical symptoms in ALS. For example, cannabinoids been shown to produce an anti- inflammatory effect by inhibiting the production and action of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and other acute phase cytokines (102). Additionally, cannabis may reduce pain sensation, through action at peripheral, spinal, and supra-spinal levels. It likely also operates through a brainstem circuit that also contributes to the pain suppressing effects of morphine (126–128) Cannabinoids produce analgesia by modulating rostral ventromedial medulla neuronal activity in a manner similar to, but pharmacologically distinct from, that of morphine (127,128). Cannabinoids are centrally and peripherally acting analgesics with a different mechanism of action than opioids, although the analgesia produced by cannabinoids and opioids may involve similar pathways at the brainstem level. There are now multiple, well-controlled clinical studies using cannabis to treat pain, showing ample evidence of analgesic efficacy (129,130). A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of double-blind randomized controlled trials that compared any cannabis preparation to placebo among subjects with chronic pain showed a total of eighteen completed trials. The studies indicate that that cannabis is moderately efficacious for treatment of chronic pain (129,130). In the setting of ALS, cannabis use should be dose-titrated to the point of comfort. If additional opiate medications are needed to get effective pain control then the anti-emetic effect of cannabis may help with the nausea sometimes associated with use of opioids. Use of cannabis may lower the need for opiate medications and may be safely used concomitantly as the opioid receptor system is distinct from the cannabinoid system. Additionally, the use of cannabis does not cause respiratory suppression or decreased gut motility, which are particularly helpful in this setting.

In addition to pain, spasticity is also a major problem for patients with ALS. Cannabis has an inhibitory effect via augmentation of gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) pathways in the central nervous system (131–133). This produces motor neuron inhibition at spinal levels in mice. Several past studies have suggested that cannabinoid therapy provide at least a subjective reduction of spasticity, although virtually all of the studies have been done in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) (134–137). In addition to pain and spasticity, there are other pharmacological effects of cannabis that may be useful for ALS patients. Patients with ALS and bulbar symptoms also usually have difficulty controlling and swallowing the saliva that is normally present in the oral cavity. Cannabis is a potent anti-salivary compound that swiftly dries the oral cavity and upper airway, potentially reducing the risk for aspiration pneumonia and increasing patient comfort. Cannabis also increases appetite and may help prevent “ALS cachexia”, a phenomenon experienced by some patients where weight loss occurs in excess of that caused by muscle atrophy and reduced caloric intake. In addition to improving appetite, cannabis may also help with mood state and sleep. Patients with ALS previously have reported that cannabis is at least moderately effective at reducing symptoms of pain, spasticity, drooling, appetite loss, and depression (104).

The American Academy of Neurology recently published some excellent systematic literature reviews regarding the use of cannabis in neurological disorders as well as specifically in another neurodegenerative disorder, multiple sclerosis (MS) (136–137). The authors concluded that in patients with MS, oral cannabis extracts are effective to treat spasticity “painful spasms” as well as central pain. This included including spasticity-related pain. Risk of serious adverse psychopathologic effects was estimated to be approximately 1%.

Route of administration is an important determinant of the pharmacokinetics of the various cannabinoids in cannabis, particularly absorption and metabolism (138). Cannabis does not need to be smoked to get a medical beneficial effect. Inhalation does have the advantage of rapid onset of effect and easy dose titration. However, due to their volatility, cannabinoids will vaporize at a much lower temperature than combustion, allowing them to be inhaled as a warm air mist, which is a much healthier option than smoking. Cannabinoids in the form of an aerosol in inhaled smoke or vapors are absorbed and delivered to the brain and circulation rapidly, as expected of a highly lipid-soluble drug. Cannabis may also be ingested orally, but this delivery route has markedly different pharmacokinetics compared with inhalation. The onset of action is delayed and titration of dosing is more difficult. Maximum cannabinoid blood levels are only reached up to 6 hours post ingestion, with a much longer half-life, as long as 20–30 hours (138). This would also apply to any orally ingested cannabinoid, including dronabinol (Marinol). Dronabinol is available as a Schedule III (CIII) controlled substance per the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) guidelines (138). The DEA still considers botanical cannabis as a Schedule I (CI) controlled substance, dangerous and without medical use (139). However, consider that natural cannabis contain, at best, 20% THC. As noted previously, there are beneficial physiological effects when the other cannabinoid forms are present, as is the case with natural cannabis plant material. Most patients with ALS would find likely find dronabinol too sedating and associated with too many psychoactive effects and it is not an appropriate substitute for natural cannabis. Finally the cannabinoids may also be made in to a liniment and absorbed through the skin, although this is the least efficient mode of delivery.

Although the medicinal use of cannabis is now allowed in a growing number of states in America, obtaining the medicine must be done through “cooperatives” as it will not be available in a typical pharmacy. This may create varying degrees of psychological stress for patients with ALS and their caregivers (140). Moreover, third party payers and insurance companies will not likely pay for cannabis use even for medical use as it is not Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved for any indication. As long as cannabis remaining as schedule one compound, there will not likely be much interest from the pharmaceutical industry to finance the massive costs of clinical trials needed to get FDA approval for a given indication.

C. Acupuncture
Acupuncture is a technique that involves the insertion of thin needles through the skin at specific points with the goal of achieving a therapeutic effect, most often pain reduction (141). Acupuncture originated in ancient China and is a key component of traditional Chinese medicine. In the West, several different acupuncture schools and modalities are available. There are traditional Chinese and Japanese techniques and “fusion” Contemporary Western approaches, and needle insertion is sometimes accompanied by the application of small electric currents (electroacupuncture) or injection of chemicals (acupuncture injection therapy) (141,142). Such diversity is a challenge when discussing the intended effects and results of acupuncture. It is also one of the reasons why few systematic studies exist on the topic as acupuncture treatments are highly individualized, dynamic, difficult to blind, and heavily dependent on practitioner training and experience. Acupuncture has been proposed as both a symptomatic ALS treatment (pain control) and a way to slow, stop or reverse progression (143–145).

Mechanism(s)
There are both traditional and modern theories on the mechanisms of acupuncture. Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) holds that an energy called “qi, ” which flows along specific paths or meridians, regulates body functions (141,142). Disease occurs when there are disruptions or blockages in the flow of this energy, and insertion of needles into specific locations (acupoints) restores energy flow and ameliorates disease (141,142). Science has yet to find convincing evidence for qi, meridians or acupoints (142,146,147).

More theories start with needle insertions activating vaso-active substances and neuropeptides such as histamine, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), neuropeptide Y, enkephalin, beta-endorphin, and dynorphin (142, 148–151). In fact, the skin around the needles often becomes red and a small weal can be seen under the skin. Needle manipulation by hand or addition of heat or electrical stimulation (electro-acupuncture) may potentiate these effects. Some of these substances, in turn are purported to have downstream effects on brain areas involved in pain perception (150). These substances may also modulate the immune system (151–154); in doing so, they could theoretically alter the progression of diseases where the immune system plays a pathogenic role, including ALS (155–156). Indeed, elevated beta-endorphin levels (150), altered functional MRI patterns, (156–161), and even altered inflammatory markers (162–165) including in ALS animal models (164,165) can occur following acupuncture. Opioid antagonists such as naloxone or genetic down regulation of opioid receptors can block the beneficial effects of acupuncture (150).

However, even these modern theories have problems. They do not explain acupoints. “Sham” acupuncture utilizing telescoping needles that do not break the skin can sometimes work as well as “real” acupuncture, raising the possibility that acupuncture works via a placebo effect (142). The above described mechanistic studies do not yield consistent results across investigators (142).

Potential Uses in ALS
While the underlying mechanisms of acupuncture have not been completely elucidated, and may involve a significant placebo component, there is some evidence that it could help relieve 2 common ALS symptoms: pain (167–170) and spasticity (171).

More controversial is the possibility that acupuncture could slow, stop or reverse ALS progression. A small, flawed study in a mouse model of ALS showed that acupuncture was associated with improved motor neuron survival and delayed loss of motor performance compared to mice that did not receive any acupuncture (172). This has yet to be independently replicated. There is only 1 published trial of acupuncture in patients with ALS (173). In this trial, 18 patients were treated twice daily for 5 days, with before and after measurements of oxygen saturation, end-tidal carbon dioxide, respiratory rate, pulse rate and ALSFRS-R. Acupuncture treatments was associated with statistically significant improvements in oxygen saturation and pulse rate. However, the size of these improvements (mean oxygen saturation increased from 95.42% to 95.58% and mean pulse rate increased from 82.49 to 80.08) are of dubious clinical significance.

More impressive than the animal study or the small trial are 2 published case series describing the effects of acupuncture on ALS (174–177). Both these series describe improvements in motor function occurring with acupuncture. Unfortunately these reports suffer from the use of other treatments (such as Chinese herbs or detoxification regimens) at the same time as the acupuncture, lack of detail regarding the ALS diagnoses, lack of a control group, lack of blinding and failure to use validated ALS outcome measures (178).

Costs and Risks
Costs of acupuncture will vary greatly depending on the specific type and frequency. Within the online community PatientsLikeMe, members with ALS report a range of costs from less than $25 to more than $200 per month (179).

Large series suggest that acupuncture is generally safe but not entirely without risk. Serious adverse events have been described including cardiac tamponade (142,180), pneumothorax (142,181), and transmission of infections (142,182). Mild adverse events such as pain or bleeding occur in 7–11% of patients (142, 183–185).

D. Chelation
Chelation therapy is a medical procedure in which a chelating agent is administered to the patient with the objective of removing a specific heavy metal from the body. The chelating agent binds to the heavy metal inactivating its toxic effect. This soluble compound is then excreted from the body. The chelating agent can be administered intravenously, orally or intramuscularly.

Approved Use
Chelation therapy is the main treatment for heavy metal poisoning. The chelating agent used depends on the type of metal to which the patient has been exposed. For example, Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) and Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) are used in lead poisoning, and Dimercapto-propane sulfonate (DMPS) in arsenic and mercury poisoning.

Alternative Use
Chelation therapy has been, and continues to be used as an alternative therapeutic approach in various conditions including autism, cardiovascular disease and cancer. This practice is not based on scientific studies and may lead to death (186,187).

Use in ALS Patients
In spite of intense study over many years, there is no consistent evidence that any heavy metal toxicity can cause ALS (188,189). It should not be surprising, then, that there is no evidence that chelation therapy is useful for the treatment of ALS. In fact, there is evidence to the contrary. One case report (190) described an ALS patient with elevated blood level and massive urinary excretion of mercury which did not respond to chelation treatment with DMSA. Another case report described a patient who developed bulbar onset ALS in the setting of chronic lead intoxication from drinking water. Again, treatment with DSMA was administered for six months and had no effect on clinical course (191). Finally, a study where 53 patients with ALS or SMA and a control group were given DMSA did not show a difference in the urinary excretion of lead and mercury between the 2 groups (192). A search of the World Wide Web reveals many other individual reports of patients who did not benefit from chelation therapy.

Risks
Chelation is generally felt to be a safe treatment when used properly. The use of sodium EDTA instead of calcium EDTA has resulted in severe hypocalcemia that lead to death in at least 3 reported patients (193). Another reported side effect is elevated creatinine reflecting potential kidney damage (187).

E. Energy Healing
Energy healing, which also includes spiritual and faith healing, is a branch of alternative medicine where the healer channels healing energy onto a patient in order to cure them from a certain disease. This is usually performed when the healer lays their hands on the patient, although some healers do an “off hands” method or even do remote healing with the patient being in a different location. There are many different types of energy healing. The most commonly used are spiritual healing and psychic healing, distant healing, intercessory prayer, therapeutic touch, healing touch, esoteric healing, Reiki, magnetic healing, Qigong healing, Pranic healing and Crystal healing. Some forms of energy healing use an “observable energy” such a magnet or light although in most cases, the energy is channeled via touch.

Energy Healing in Medicine
Energy healing has been studied in randomized, placebo-controlled trials in multiple diseases such as asthma (194), cardiac bypass surgery (195), wound healing (196), postoperative oral pain (197), fatigue in breast cancer patients undergoing radiation therapy (198) and procedural pain in very preterm neonates (199). These robust studies have all shown no effect on the disease progression or symptoms.

Energy Healing in ALS
There are no trials on the effect of energy healing in ALS patients. However, there are individual testimonials of improvement in patients with ALS with energy healing. One of these testimonials can be found on the webpage of Dean Kraft, one of the more famous energy healers in the United States. The following link: www.deankrafthealer.com/CaseHistory-NeldaBuss.html depicts the story of Nelda Buss, a patient diagnosed with ALS in 1985. Dean Kraft focused “a white stream of energy into her deteriorating respiratory system, her nerves…”. She subsequently regained significant muscle strength including regaining the ability to walk. The diagnosis and improvement in this patient were independently validated (200). Many other healers have their own webpage with a story on curing ALS. In addition, there is a documentary film on healing ALS pending funding http://healingals.com/. The movie’s mission is to educate people diagnosed with ALS and their families about holistic protocols for ALS that can slow, stop and even reverse the progression of ALS by showing multiple interviews with people who were diagnosed with ALS and had their disease cured through different holistic protocols. Unfortunately, along these claims of cure from ALS, there are many reports on ALS forums of lack of benefit, and high expenditure, with different type of energy healing. The fact that ALS can sometimes reverse spontaneously has to be considered as an alternate explanation for the above described improvements (201–203).

Costs and Risks
The costs of energy healing vary depending on the practitioner, methods and frequency. Dean Kraft charged Nelda Buss $75 per session and $25,000 overall (200).

There appear to be no serious risks for energy healing on patient’s health. However, some authors argue that promoting energy healing could be detrimental to patients and health care systems (204–206). According to the Ernst, for example, healing can be expensive and might divert patients from effective treatments. He argues that spiritual healing might promote the belief in a supernatural healing “energy,” which undermines rationality in general and hence boost pseudoscience (204–206). It could also potentially divert patients from adequate, scientifically studied treatments.

III. Options for Reviewing CAM with PALS
There are at least 3 models by which decisions get made in the doctor-patient relationship. These are all options for reviewing CAM with PALS in clinic. Here we review these models and options.

A. Paternalism
The oldest model, which has existed since the beginning of medicine, is paternalism. In this, the doctor acts as a parent or guardian and defines the patient’s goals and the methods for attaining these (207). Here, a patient’s question about an alternative therapy might be met with a phrase from the doctor like “That is not likely to help you and may even be harmful. I do not want you to pursue that.” There are several problems with this approach. While doctors do have many years of training and experience in evaluating care options, they may not always share the same goals, values and acceptable risk/benefit ratio with patients. This model ignores the fact that patients are different in terms of how they want their information presented (208). “Active seekers” want to know everything right away about their condition and all its treatment options. “Selective seekers” just want a trickle of information, just enough to make the decisions they need to make today. “Information avoiders” want to have information and decisions filtered through someone else, often a family member or friend (208). Finally, and worst of all, paternalism has been abused, both at the bedside and in clinical research, resulting in modern malpractice and informed consent laws (209).

B. Autonomy
A newer model, fueled by the Internet, is autonomy. Here the patient’s goals and methods for achieving them are assumed to be central, correct and absolute. The doctor becomes a “vending machine,” helping the patient procure whatever it is they want. In this model, a question about an alternative therapy might be answered by the doctor as follows: “I understand what you want to do. How can I help?” Advantages of this model include respect for patient values and goals, and allowance for different information gathering preferences. Disadvantages include underutilization of physician education and experience, and the fact that the information being used by the patient to make their decision may be flawed or inaccurate (210).

C. Shared Decision Making
In between paternalism and autonomy is “shared decision making.” Here the patient’s values and goals are central, but recognized to be fluid and potentially modifiable based on new information. The physician helps define the pros and cons of different treatment options being considered, and may even make a suggestion based on their own synthesis of the data and their clinical experience. This model utilizes the talents and the skill set of the physician while sill allowing the patient to ultimately define their values, goals, acceptable risks and benefits. There is data suggesting that shared decision making is preferred by both patients (211) and doctors (212) and associated with improved compliance and better health outcomes (213). This biggest problem with shared decision making is that it takes significantly more physician time than paternalism or autonomy.

A group called ALSUntangled has developed a “shared shared decision making” model that helps with this time issue (210). There are 3 parts to this: inputs, reviews and outputs. Inputs on alternative ALS therapies come from patients and families, either via face to face visits with clinicians that are part of the group, or via email or Twitter (@alsuntangled). Reviews follow a specific standard operating procedure, with a group of 100 investigators from across 10 countries grading each alternative therapy’s mechanism, preclinical data, case reports, trials and risk (214). Outputs follow a standard format as well, and are published via free open access in the journal Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration and on the website www.alsuntangled.org. Now when a patient asks about an alternative therapy, a busy clinician that wants to engage in shared decision making can refer them to an ALSUntangled review, rather than have to repeat the research themselves.

IV. Conclusions
Patients with ALS often consider CAM options, especially diets, nutritional supplements, cannabis, acupuncture, chelation and energy healing. This chapter reviews these CAM options for patients and clinicians who opt to engage in shared decision making. ALSUntangled is an international program that utilizes shared shared decision making to objectively review CAM options, reducing some of the physician time burden while helping patients make more informed treatment decisions.

Disclosure Statement: Dr. Bedlack has received research support from the ALS Association and Motor Neurone Disease Association for ALSUntangled, and is a consultant for Neuraltus Pharmaceuticals

Key Points
Patients with ALS often consider complementary and alternative therapies they read about on the Internet.

Common types of alternative therapies considered for ALS include special diets, nutritional supplements, cannabis, acupuncture, chelation and energy healing.

Physicians may handle discussions about alternative therapies via paternalism, autonomy or shared decision-making.

ALSUntangled reviews alternative therapies via a shared shared decision making model.


   IV. References
1 
            http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/complementaryandalternativemedicine.html 
           Accessed 2/21/15 
2 
            Wasner M  
            Klier H  
            Borasio G  
           The use of alternative medicine by patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurol Sci 191 2001 151 154 11677007 
3 
            Vardeny O  
            Bromberg M  
           The use of herbal supplements and alternative therapies by patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Herbal Therapy 2—5 5 23 31 
4 
            Miller RG  
            Jackson CE  
            Kasarskis J  
            England JD  
            Forshew D  
            Johnston W  
             
           Practice Parameter update: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Drug, nutritional, and respiratory therapies (an evidence-based review) Neurology 2009 73 1218 1226 19822872 
5 
            Miller RG  
            Jackson CE  
            Kasarskis J  
            England JD  
            Forshew D  
            Johnston W  
             
           Practice Parameter update: The care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Multidisciplinary care, symptom management, and cognitive/behavioral impairment (an evidence-based review) Neurology 2009 73 1227 1233 19822873 
6 
            Karam C  
            Paganoni S  
            Joyce N  
            Carter G  
            Bedlack R  
           Palliative care issues in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: an evidence based review Am J Palliat Care 2014 9 8 Epub ahead of print 
7 
            https://www.google.com/#q=als+treatment 
           Accessed 2/17/15 
8 
            Chew S  
            Khandji A  
            Montes J  
            Mitsumoto H  
            Gordon P  
           Olfactory ensheathing glia injections in Beijing: misleading patients with ALS Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 2007 8 314 316 17917850 
9 
            Piepers S  
            Van Den Berg L  
           No benefits from experimental treatment with olfactory ensheathing cells in patients with ALS Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 2010 11 328  330 20433414 
10 
            Bedlack RS  
            Pastula DM  
            Welsh E  
            Pulley D  
            Cudkowicz M  
           Scrutinizing enrollment in ALS trials: room for improvement? Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2008 9 257 265 18608092 
11 
            Kasarskis EJ  
             
           Nutritional status of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: relation to the proximity of death Am J Clin Nutr 1996 63 130 7 8604660 
12 
            Desport JC  
             
           Nutritional assessment and survival in ALS patients Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2000 1 91 6 11467055 
13 
            Heffernan C  
             
           Nutritional management in MND/ALS patients: an evidence based review Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2004 5 72 83 15204009 
14 
            Pedersen WA  
            Mattson MP  
           No benefit of dietary restriction on disease onset or progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase mutant mice Brain Res 1999 833 117 120 10375685 
15 
            Hamadeh MJ  
            Rodriguez MC  
            Kaczor JJ  
            Tarnopolsky MA  
           Caloric restriction transiently improves motor performance but hastens clinical onset of disease in the Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase mutant G93A mouse Muscle Nerve 2005 31 214 220 15625688 
16 
            Zhao Z  
            Sui Y  
            Gao W  
            Cai B  
            Fan D  
           Effects of diet on adenosine monophosphate- activated protein kinase activity and disease progression in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model 2015 43 67 79 
17 
            Mattson MP  
            Cutler RG  
            Camandola S  
           Energy intake and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neuromolecular Med 2007 9 17 20 17114821 
18 
            Dupuis L  
            Oudart H  
            René F  
            Gonzalez de Aguilar JL  
            Loeffler JP  
           Evidence for defective energy homeostasis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: benefit of a high-energy diet in a transgenic mouse model Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 27 11159 64 15263088 
19 
            Marin B  
             
           Alteration of nutritional status at diagnosis is a prognostic factor for survival of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2011 82 628 34 21097551 
20 
            Paganoni S  
             
           Body mass index, not dyslipidemia, is an independent predictor of survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Muscle Nerve 2011 44 20 4 21607987 
21 
            Desport JC  
            Preux PM  
            Truong CT  
            Courat L  
            Vallat JM  
            Couratier P  
           Nutritional assessment and survival in ALS patients Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2000 1 91 6 11467055 
22 
            Lindauer E  
            Dupuis L  
            Müller HP  
            Neumann H  
            Ludolph AC  
            Kassubek J  
           Adipose Tissue Distribution Predicts Survival in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis PLoS One 2013 8 e67783 23826340 
23 
            Körner S  
            Hendricks M  
            Kollewe K  
            Zapf A  
            Dengler R  
            Silani V  
            Petri S  
           Weight loss, dysphagia and supplement intake in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS): impact on quality of life and therapeutic options BMC Neurol 2013 13 84 23848967 
24 
            Luu LCT  
            Kasarskis EJ  
            Tandan R  
           Nutritional treatment: theoretical and practical issues 
            Mitsumoto H  
            Przedborski S  
            Gordon PH  
           Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis New York, NY Taylor &amp; Francis 2006 721 35 
25 
            Kasarskis EJ  
            Mendiondo MS  
            Wells S  
            Malguizo MS  
            Thompson M  
            Healey M  
            Kryscio RJ  
           ALS Nutrition/NIPPV Study Group The ALS Nutrition/NIPPV Study: design, feasibility, and initial results Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2011 12 17 25 21271789 
26 
            Kasarskis EJ  
            Mendiondo MS  
            Matthews DE  
            Mitsumoto H  
            Tandan R  
            Simmons Z  
            Bromberg MB  
            Kryscio RJ  
           ALS Nutrition/NIPPV Study Group Estimating daily energy expenditure in individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Am J Clin Nutr 2014 99 792 803 24522445 
27 
            https://mednet.mc.uky.edu/alscalculator/ 
           Accessed 2/21/15 
28 
            Zhao Z  
            Lange DJ  
            Voustianiouk A  
            MacGrogan D  
            Ho L  
            Suh J  
            Humala N  
            Thiyagarajan M  
            Wang J  
            Pasinetti GM  
           A ketogenic diet as a potential novel therapeutic intervention in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis BMC Neurosci 2006 7 29 16584562 
29 
            Dorst J  
            Cypionka J  
            Ludolph AC  
           High-caloric food supplements in the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a prospective interventional study Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 2013 14 533 6 23944684 
30 
            Wills AM  
            Hubbard J  
            Macklin EA  
            Glass J  
            Tandan R  
            Simpson EP  
            Brooks B  
            Gelinas D  
            Mitsumoto H  
            Mozaffar T  
            Hanes GP  
            Ladha SS  
            Heiman-Patterson T  
            Katz J  
            Lou JS  
            Mahoney K  
            Grasso D  
            Lawson R  
            Yu H  
            Cudkowicz M  
           MDA Clinical Research Network Hypercaloric enteral nutrition in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 trial Lancet 2014 383 2065 72 24582471 
31 
            Yip PK  
            Pizzasegola C  
            Gladman S  
            Biggio ML  
            Marino M  
            Jayasinghe M  
            Ullah F  
            Dyall SC  
            Malaspina A  
            Bendotti C  
            Michael-Titus A  
           The omega-3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid accelerates disease progression in a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis PLoS One 2013 8 4 e61626 23620776 
32 
            Miller RG  
            Jackson CE  
            Kasarskis EJ  
             
           Practice parameter update: the care of the patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: drug, nutritional, and respiratory therapies (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology Neurology 2009 73 1218 1226 19822872 
33 
            Mathus-Vliegen LM  
             
           Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and impaired pulmonary function Gastrointest Endosc 1994 40 463 469 7926537 
34 
            Mazzini L  
             
           Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy and enteral nutrition in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Neurol 1995 242 695 698 8568533 
35 
            Dorst J  
            Dupuis L  
            Petri S  
            Kollewe K  
            Abdulla S  
            Wolf J  
            Weber M  
            Czell D  
            Burkhardt C  
            Hanisch F  
            Vielhaber S  
            Meyer T  
            Frisch G  
            Kettemann D  
            Grehl T  
            Schrank B  
            Ludolph AC  
           Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a prospective observational study J Neurol 2015 1 25 Epub ahead of print 
36 
            Chio A  
             
           Percutaneous radiological gastrostomy: a safe and effective method of nutritional tube placement in advanced ALS J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004 75 645 647 15026518 
37 
            http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Legislation/FederalFoodDrugandCosmeticActFDCAct/SignificantAmendmentstotheFDCAct/ucm148003.htm 
           date accessed 2/14/2015 
38 
            Bradley WG  
            Anderson F  
            Gowda N  
            Miller RG  
           Changes in the management of ALS since the publication of the AAN ALS practice parameter 1999 Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2004 5 240 244 15799554 
39 
            Rosenfeld J  
            Ellis A  
           Nutrition and Dietary Supplements in Motor Neuron Disease Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2008 19 573 18625417 
40 ALSUntangled Group ALS Untangled No. 20: the Deanna protocol Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 2013 14 319 23 23638638 
41 
            http://www.winningthefight.org/t/deanna-protocol 
           Accessed 2/21/15 
42 
            Poff Csilla AriAngela M  
            Held Heather E  
            Landon Carol S  
            Goldhagen Craig R  
            Mavromates Nicholas  
            D’Agostino Dominic P  
           Metabolic Therapy with Deanna Protocol Supplementation Delays Disease,*  Progression and Extends Survival in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) Mouse Model  PLoS One 2014 9 7 e103526 25061944 
43 
            Ludolph A  
            Bendotti C  
            Blaugrund E  
            Chio A  
            Greensmith L  
            Loeffler J  
             
           Guidelines for preclinical animal research in ALS/MND: a consensus meeting Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2010 11 38 45 20184514 
44 
            Xu Z  
            Chen S  
            Li X  
            Luo G  
            Li L  
            Le W  
           Neuroprotective effects of (−)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurochem Res 2006 31 1263 9 17021948 
45 
            Matthews RT  
            Yang L  
            Browne S  
            Baik M  
            Beal MF  
           Coenzyme Q10 administration increases brain mitochondrial concentrations and exerts neuroprotective effects Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 95 8892 7 9671775 
46 
            Ferrante KL  
            Shefner J  
            Zhang H  
             
           Tolerance of high-dose (3,000 mg/day) coenzyme Q10 in ALS Neurology 2005 65 1834 1836 16344537 
47 
            Kaufmann P  
            Thompson JL  
            Levy G  
             
           Phase II trial of CoQ10 for ALS finds insufficient evidence to justify phase III Ann Neurol 2009 66 235 244 19743457 
48 
            Adhihetty PJ  
            Beal MF  
           Creatine and its potential therapeutic value for targeting cellular energy impairment in neurodegenerative diseases Neuromolecular Med 2008 10 275 90 19005780 
49 
            Andreassen OA  
            Jenkins BG  
            Dedeoglu A  
            Ferrante KL  
            Bogdanov MB  
            Kaddurah-Daouk R  
            Beal MF  
           Increases in cortical glutamate concentrations in transgenic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice are attenuated by creatine supplementation J Neurochem 2001 77 383 90 11299300 
50 
            Derave W  
            Van Den Bosch L  
            Lemmens G  
            Eijnde BO  
            Robberecht W  
            Hespel P  
           Skeletal muscle properties in a transgenic mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: effects of creatine treatment Neurobiol Dis 2003 13 264 72 12901841 
51 
            Rosenfeld J  
            King RM  
            Jackson CE  
             
           Creatine monohydrate in ALS: Effects on strength, fatigue, respiratory status and ALSFRS Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2008 9 266 272 18608103 
52 
            Groeneveld GJ  
            Veldink JH  
            van der Tweel I  
             
           A randomized sequential trial of creatine in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 2003 53 437 445 12666111 
53 
            Pastula DM  
            Moore DH  
            Bedlack RS  
           Creatine for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012 12 CD005225 10.1002/14651858.CD005225.pub3 23235621 
54 
            Atassi N  
            Ratai EM  
            Greenblatt DJ  
             
           A phase I, pharmacokinetic, dosage escalation study of creatine monohydrate in subjects with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2010 11 508 513 20698808 
55 
            Erb M  
            Hoffmann-Enger B  
            Deppe H  
            Soeberdt M  
            Haefeli RH  
            Rummey C  
            Feurer A  
            Gueven N  
           Features of idebenone and related short-chain quinones that rescue ATP levels under conditions of impaired mitochondrial complex I PLoS One 2012 7 e36153 22558363 
56 
            Parkinson MH  
            Schulz JB  
            Giunti P  
           Co-enzyme Q10 and idebenone use in Friedreich’s ataxia J Neurochem 2013 126 Suppl 1 125 41 23859348 
57 
            Jaber S  
            Polster BM  
           Idebenone and neuroprotection: antioxidant, pro-oxidant, or electron carrier? J Bioenerg Biomembr 2015 47 111 8 25262284 
58 
            Gülçin I  
           Antioxidant and antiradical activities of L-carnitine Life Sci 2006 18 78 803 11 16253281 
59 
            Kira Y  
            Nishikawa M  
            Ochi A  
            Sato E  
            Inoue M  
           L-carnitine suppresses the onset of neuromuscular degeneration and increases the life span of mice with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Brain Res 2006 1070 206 14 16412993 
60 
            Beghi E  
            Pupillo E  
            Bonito V  
            Buzzi P  
            Caponnetto C  
            Chiò A  
            Corbo M  
            Giannini F  
            Inghilleri M  
            Bella VL  
            Logroscino G  
            Lorusso L  
            Lunetta C  
            Mazzini L  
            Messina P  
            Mora G  
            Perini M  
            Quadrelli ML  
            Silani V  
            Simone IL  
            Tremolizzo L  
           Italian ALS Study Group Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial of acetyl-L-carnitine for ALS Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 2013 14 397 405 23421600 
61 
            Calder PC  
            Yaqoob P  
           Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and human health outcomes Biofactors 2009 35 266 272 19391122 
62 
            Dyall SC  
            Michael-Titus AT  
           Neurological benefits of omega-3 fatty acids Neuromolecular Med 2008 10 219 235 18543124 
63 
            Fitzgerald KC  
            O’Reilly ÉJ  
            Falcone GJ  
            McCullough ML  
            Park Y  
            Kolonel LN  
            Ascherio A  
           Dietary ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid intake and risk for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis JAMA Neurol 2014 71 1102 10 25023276 
64 
            Yip PK  
            Pizzasegola C  
            Gladman S  
             
           The omega-3 fatty acid eicosapentaenoic acid accelerates disease progression in a model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis PLoS One 2013 8 e61626 23620776 
65 
            Mancuso R  
            del Valle J  
            Modol L  
            Martinez A  
            Granado-Serrano AB  
            Ramirez-Núñez O  
            Pallás M  
            Portero-Otin M  
            Osta R  
            Navarro X  
           Resveratrol improves motoneuron function and extends survival in SOD1(G93A) ALS mice Neurotherapeutics 2014 11 419 32 24414863 
66 
            Song L  
            Chen L  
            Zhang X  
            Li J  
            Le W  
           Resveratrol ameliorates motor neuron degeneration and improves survival in SOD1(G93A) mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Biomed Res Int 2014 2014 483501 25057490 
67 
            Mancuso R  
            Del Valle J  
            Morell M  
            Pallás M  
            Osta R  
            Navarro X  
           Lack of synergistic effect of resveratrol and sigma-1 receptor agonist (PRE-084) in SOD1G 93 A ALS mice: overlapping effects or limited therapeutic opportunity? Orphanet J Rare Dis 2014 9 78 24885036 
68 
            Park EJ  
            Pezzuto JM  
           The pharmacology of resveratrol in animals and humans Biochim Biophys Acta 2015 31 S0925 4439 
69 
            Molina JA  
            de Bustos F  
            Jiménez-Jiménez FJ  
            Esteban J  
            Guerrero-Sola A  
            Zurdo M  
            Ortí-Pareja M  
            Gasalla T  
            Gómez-Escalonilla C  
            Ramírez-Ramos C  
            Guillamón F  
            Arenas J  
           Serum levels of beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and vitamin A in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Acta Neurol Scand 1999 99 315 7 10348162 
70 
            Crochemore C  
            Virgili M  
            Bonamassa B  
            Canistro D  
            Pena-Altamira E  
            Paolini M  
            Contestabile A  
           Long-term dietary administration of valproic acid does not affect, while retinoic acid decreases, the lifespan of G93A mice, a model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Muscle Nerve 2009 39 548 52 19296491 
71 
            Mattson MP  
            Shea TB  
           Folate and homocysteine metabolism in neural plasticity and neurodegenerative disorders Trends Neurosci 2003 26 137 146 12591216 
72 
            Zoccolella S  
            Simone IL  
            Lamberti P  
             
           Elevated plasma homocysteine levels in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurology 2008 70 3 222 225 18195267 
73 
            Valentino F  
            Bivona G  
            Butera D  
             
           Elevated cerebrospinal fluid and plasma homocysteine levels in ALS Eur J Neurol 2010 17 84 89 19659753 
74 
            Zhang X  
            Chen S  
            Li L  
            Wang Q  
            Le W  
           Folic acid protects motor neurons against the increased homocysteine, inflammation and apoptosis in SOD1 G93A transgenic mice Neuropharmacology 2008 54 7 1112 1119 18436268 
75 
            Hemendinger RA  
            Armstrong EJ 3rd  
            Brooks BR  
           Methyl vitamin B12 but not methylfolate rescues a motor neuron-like cell line from homocysteine-mediated cell death Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2011 251 217 225 21237187 
76 
            Song L  
            Gao Y  
            Zhang X  
            Le W  
           Galactooligosaccharide improves the animal survival and alleviates motor neuron death in SOD1G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neuroscience 2013 246 281 290 23673277 
77 
            Poloni M  
            Patrini C  
            Rocchelli B  
            Rindi G  
           Thiamin monophosphate in the CSF of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Arch Neurol 1982 39 507 509 7103799 
78 
            Poloni M  
            Mazzarello P  
            Patrini C  
            Pinelli P  
           Inversion of T/TMP ratio in ALS: A specific finding? Ital J Neurol Sci 1986 7 333 335 3015835 
79 
            Moges H  
            Vasconcelos OM  
            Campbell WW  
             
           Light therapy and supplementary riboflavin in the SOD1 transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) Lasers Surg Med 2009 41 52 59 19143012 
80 
            Fitzgerald KC  
            O’Reilly EJ  
            Fondell E  
             
           Intakes of vitamin C and carotenoids and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Pooled results from 5 cohort studies Ann Neurol 2013 73 236 245 23362045 
81 
            Karam C  
            Scelsa SN  
           Can vitamin D delay the progression of ALS? Med Hypotheses 2011 76 643 645 21310542 
82 
            Camu W  
            Tremblier B  
            Plassot C  
            Alphandery S  
            Salsac C  
            Pageot N  
            Juntas-Morales R  
            Scamps F  
            Daures JP  
            Raoul C  
           Vitamin D confers protection to motoneurons and is a prognostic factor of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurobiol Aging 2014 35 1198 205 24378089 
83 
            Gianforcaro A  
            Hamadeh MJ  
           Dietary vitamin D3 supplementation at 10x the adequate intake improves functional capacity in the G93A transgenic mouse model of ALS, a pilot study CNS Neurosci Ther 2012 18 547 557 22591278 
84 
            Gianforcaro A  
            Solomon JA  
            Hamadeh MJ  
           Vitamin D(3) at 50x AI attenuates the decline in paw grip endurance, but not disease outcomes, in the G93A mouse model of ALS, and is toxic in females PLoS One 2013 8 2 e30243 23405058 
85 
            Solomon JA  
            Gianforcaro A  
            Hamadeh MJ  
           Vitamin D3 deficiency differentially affects functional and disease outcomes in the G93A mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis PLoS One 2011 6 e29354 22216257 
86 
            Karam C  
            Barrett MJ  
            Imperato T  
            MacGowan DJ  
            Scelsa S  
           Vitamin D deficiency and its supplementation in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J Clin Neurosci 2013 20 11 1550 1553 23815870 
87 ALSUntangled No. 24: Vitamin D Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal degeneration 2014 15 318 320 
88 
            Gurney ME  
            Cutting FB  
            Zhai P  
             
           Benefit of vitamin E, riluzole, and gabapentin in a transgenic model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Ann Neurol 1996 39 147 157 8967745 
89 
            Desnuelle C  
            Dib M  
            Garrel C  
            Favier A  
           A double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial of alpha-tocopherol (vitamin E) in the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS riluzole-tocopherol study group Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2001 2 9 18 11465936 
90 
            Graf M  
            Ecker D  
            Horowski R  
             
           High dose vitamin E therapy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as add-on therapy to riluzole: Results of a placebo-controlled double-blind study J Neural Transm 2005 112 649 660 15517433 
91 
            Wang H  
            O’Reilly EJ  
            Weisskopf MG  
             
           Vitamin E intake and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A pooled analysis of data from 5 prospective cohort studies Am J Epidemiol 2011 173 595 602 21335424 
92 
            Carter GT  
            Bedlack R  
            Hardiman O  
            Ostrow L  
            Kabashi E  
           ALSUntangled Group Collaborators (79) ALSUntangled No. 16: cannabis Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2012 13 400 4 22632446 
93 
            Kim K  
            Moore DH  
            Makriyannis A  
            Abood ME  
           AM1241, a cannabinoid CB2 receptor selective compound, delays disease progression in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Eur J Pharmacol 2006 542 1–3 100 105 16781706 
94 
            Shoemaker JL  
            Seely KA  
            Reed RL  
            Crow JP  
            Prather PL  
           The CB2 cannabinoid agonist AM-1241 prolongs survival in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis when initiated at symptom onset J Neurochem 2007 101 1 87 98 17241118 
95 
            Raman C  
            McAllister SD  
            Rizvi G  
            Patel SG  
            Moore DH  
            Abood ME  
           Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: delayed disease progression in mice by treatment with a cannabinoid Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2004 5 1 33 39 15204022 
96 
            Weydt P  
            Hong S  
            Witting A  
            Möller T  
            Stella N  
            Kliot M  
           Cannabinol delays symptom onset in SOD1 (G93A) transgenic mice without affecting survival Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2005 6 3 182 184 16183560 
97 
            Rossi S  
            De Chiara V  
            Musella A  
             
           Abnormal sensitivity of cannabinoid CB1 receptors in the striatum of mice with experimental amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2009 19 1 1 8 
98 
            Bilsland LG  
            Dick JR  
            Pryce G  
             
           Increasing cannabinoid levels by pharmacological and genetic manipulation delay disease progression in SOD1 mice FASEB J 2006 20 7 1003 1005 16571781 
99 
            Bilsland LG  
            Greensmith L  
           The endocannabinoid system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Curr Pharm Des 2008 14 23 2306 2316 18781981 
100 
            Zhao P  
            Ignacio S  
            Beattie EC  
            Abood ME  
           Altered presymptomatic AMPA and cannabinoid receptor trafficking in motor neurons of ALS model mice: implications for excitotoxicity Eur J Neurosci 2008 27 3 572 579 18279310 
101 
            Witting A  
            Weydt P  
            Hong S  
            Kliot M  
            Moller T  
            Stella N  
           Endocannabinoids accumulate in spinal cord of SOD1 transgenic mice J Neurochem 2004 89 6 1555 1557 15189359 
102 
            Carter GT  
            Rosen BS  
           Marijuana in the management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2001 18 4 264 270 11467101 
103 
            Gelinas D  
            Miller RG  
            Abood ME  
           A pilot study of safety and tolerability of Delta 9-THC (Marinol) treatment for ALS Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2002 3 suppl 1 23 12061945 
104 
            Amtmann D  
            Weydt P  
            Johnson KL  
            Jensen MP  
            Carter GT  
           Survey of cannabis use in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2004 21 95 104 15055508 
105 
            Carter GT  
            Abood ME  
            Aggarwal SK  
            Weiss MD  
           Cannabis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: practical and hypothetical applications, and a call for clinical trials Am J Hosp Palliat Med 2010 27 5 347 56 
106 
            Di Iorio G  
            Lupi M  
            Sarchione F  
            Matarazzo I  
            Santacroce R  
            Petruccelli F  
             
           The endocannabinoid system: a putative role in neurodegenerative diseases Int J High Risk Behav Addict 2013 2 3 100 6 24971285 
107 
            Abood ME  
           Molecular biology of cannabinoid receptors Handb Exp Pharmacol 2005 168 81 115 16596772 
108 
            McAllister SD  
            Hurst DP  
            Barnett-Norris J  
            Lynch D  
            Reggio PH  
            Abood ME  
           Structural mimicry in class A G protein-coupled receptor rotamer toggle switches: the importance of the F3.36(201)/W6.48(357) interaction in cannabinoid CB1 receptor activation J Biol Chem 2004 279 46 48024 48037 15326174 
109 
            Kapur A  
            Samaniego P  
            Thakur GA  
            Makriyannis A  
            Abood ME  
           Mapping the structural requirements in the CB1 cannabinoid receptor transmembrane helix II for signal transduction J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2008 325 1 341 348 18174385 
110 
            Anavi-Goffer S  
            Fleischer D  
            Hurst DP  
             
           Helix 8 Leu in the CB1 cannabinoid receptor contributes to selective signal transduction mechanisms J Biol Chem 2007 282 34 25100 25113 17595161 
111 
            Abood ME  
            Rizvi G  
            Sallapudi N  
            McAllister SD  
           Activation of the CB1 cannabinoid receptor protects cultured mouse spinal neurons against excitotoxicity Neurosci Lett 2001 309 3 197 201 11514075 
112 
            Klein TW  
            Lane B  
            Newton CA  
            Friedman H  
           The cannabinoid system and cytokine network Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 2000 225 1 1 8 10998193 
113 
            Pertwee RG  
           Cannabinoid receptor ligands: clinical and neuropharmacological considerations, relevant to future drug discovery and development Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2000 9 7 1553 1571 
114 
            Aizpurua-Olaizola O1  
            Omar J  
            Navarro P  
            Olivares M  
            Etxebarria N  
            Usobiaga A  
           Identification and quantification of cannabinoids in Cannabis sativa L. plants by high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry Anal Bioanal Chem 2014 406 29 7549 60 25338935 
115 
            Mechoulam R  
            Hanuš LO  
            Pertwee R  
            Howlett AC  
           Early phytocannabinoid chemistry to endocannabinoids and beyond Nat Rev Neurosci 2014 15 11 757 64 25315390 
116 
            De Petrocellis L1  
            Di Marzo V  
           Non-CB1, non-CB2 receptors for endocannabinoids, plant cannabinoids, and synthetic cannabimimetics: focus on G- protein-coupled receptors and transient receptor potential channels J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 2010 5 1 103 21 19847654 
117 
            McAllister SD  
            Hurst DP  
            Barnett-Norris J  
            Lynch D  
            Reggio PH  
            Abood ME  
           Structural mimicry in class A G protein-coupled receptor rotamer toggle switches: the importance of the F3.36(201)/W6.48(357) interaction in cannabinoid CB1 receptor activation J Biol Chem 2004 279 46 48024 48037 15326174 
118 
            Russo EB  
           Taming THC: potential cannabis synergy and phytocannabinoid-terpenoid entourage effects Br J Pharmacol 2011 163 7 1344 64 21749363 
119 
            Pertwee RG  
           Pharmacological actions of cannabinoids Handb Exp Pharmacol 2005 168 1 51 16596770 
120 
            Gonçalves TC  
            Londe AK  
            Albano RI  
            de Araújo AT Júnior  
            de Aguiar Azeredo M  
            Biagioni AF  
             
           Cannabidiol and endogenous opioid peptide-mediated mechanisms modulate antinociception induced by transcutaneous electrostimulation of the peripheral nervous system J Neurol Sci 2014–15 347 1–2 82 9 25282545 
121 
            Stout SM  
            Cimino NM  
           Exogenous cannabinoids as substrates, inhibitors, and inducers of human drug metabolizing enzymes: a systematic review Drug Metab Rev 2014 2 46 1 86 95 24160757 
122 
            Castaneto MS  
            Gorelick DA  
            Desrosiers NA  
            Hartman RL  
            Pirard S  
            Huestis MA  
           Synthetic cannabinoids: epidemiology, pharmacodynamics, and clinical implications Drug Alcohol Depend 2014 1 144 12 41 25220897 
123 
            Adams IB  
            Martin BR  
           Cannabis: pharmacology and toxicology in animals and humans Addiction 1996 91 11 1585 1614 8972919 
124 
            Romero J  
            Orgado JM  
           Cannabinoids and neurodegenerative diseases CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 2009 8 6 440 450 19839933 
125 
            Pertwee RG  
           Cannabinoid receptor ligands: clinical and neuropharmacological considerations, relevant to future drug discovery and development Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2000 9 7 1553 1571 
126 
            Meng ID  
            Manning BH  
            Martin WJ  
            Fields HL  
           1998 An analgesia circuit activated by cannabinoids Nature 395 6700 381 3 9759727 
127 
            Zeltser R  
            Seltzer Z  
            Eisen A  
            Feigenbaum JJ  
            Mechoulam R  
           1991 Suppression of neuropathic pain behavior in rats by a non-psychotropic synthetic cannabinoid with NMDA receptor-blocking properties Pain 47 1 95 103 1663228 
128 
            Elikottil J  
            Gupta P  
            Gupta K  
           The analgesic potential of cannabinoids J Opioid Manag 2009 5 6 341 57 20073408 
129 
            Martín-Sánchez E  
            Furukawa TA  
            Taylor J  
            Martin JL  
           Systematic review and meta-analysis of cannabis treatment for chronic pain Pain Med 2009 10 8 1353 68 19732371 
130 
            Lynch ME  
            Campbell F  
           Cannabinoids for treatment of chronic non-cancer pain; a systematic review of randomized trials Br J Clin Pharmacol 2011 72 5 735 44 21426373 
131 
            Fine PG1  
            Rosenfeld MJ  
           The endocannabinoid system, cannabinoids, and pain Rambam Maimonides Med J 2013 29 4 4 e0022 24228165 
132 
            Fitzgerald PB  
            Williams S  
            Daskalakis ZJ  
           A transcranial magnetic stimulation study of the effects of cannabis use on motor cortical inhibition and excitability Neuropsychopharmacology 2009 34 11 2368 75 19571796 
133 
            Lichtman AH  
            Martin BR  
           Spinal and supraspinal components of cannabinoid-induced antinociception J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1991 258 517 523 1650831 
134 
            Collin C  
            Davies P  
            Mutiboko IK  
            Ratcliffe S  
           Sativex Spasticity in MS Study Group Randomized controlled trial of cannabis-based medicine in spasticity caused by multiple sclerosis Eur J Neurol 2007 14 3 290 6 17355549 
135 
            Corey-Bloom J  
            Wolfson T  
            Gamst A  
            Jin S  
            Marcotte TD  
            Bentley H  
            Gouaux B  
           Smoked cannabis for spasticity in multiple sclerosis: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial CMAJ 2012 184 10 1143 50 22586334 
136 
            Koppel BS  
            Brust JC  
            Fife T  
            Bronstein J  
            Youssof S  
            Gronseth G  
            Gloss D  
           Systematic review: efficacy and safety of medical marijuana in selected neurologic disorders: report of the Guideline Development Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology Neurology 2014 29 82 17 1556 63 24778283 
137 
            Yadav V  
            Bever C Jr  
            Bowen J  
            Bowling A  
            Weinstock-Guttman B  
            Cameron M  
            Bourdette D  
            Gronseth GS  
            Narayanaswami P  
           Summary of evidence-based guideline: complementary and alternative medicine in multiple sclerosis: report of the guideline development subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology Neurology 2014–25 82 12 1083 92 24663230 
138 
            Carter GT  
            Weydt P  
            Kyashna-Tocha M  
            Abrams DI  
           Medical marijuana: rational guidelines for dosing IDrugs 2004 7 5 464 470 15154108 
139 Schedules of controlled substances: rescheduling of the Food and Drug Administration approved product containing synthetic dronabinol[(−) - [DELTA] less than 9 greater than - (trans)-tetrahydrocannabinol] in sesame oil and encapsulated in soft gelatin capsules from schedule II to schedule III. Department of Justice (DOJ), Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). Final rule Fed Regist 1999 64 127 35928 30 10558581 
140 
            Aggarwal SK  
            Carter GT  
            Sullivan MD  
            Morrill R  
            ZumBrunnen C  
            Mayer JD  
           Distress, Coping, and Drug Law Enforcement in a Series of Medical Cannabis Patients J Nerv Ment Dis 2013 201 4 292 303 23538974 
141 
            http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acupuncture 
           Accessed March 3, 2015 
142 
            Ernst E  
           Acupuncture-a critical analysis J Int Med 2006 259 125 137 
143 
            http://www.drmihaly-acupuncture.com/chinese-scalp-acupuncture-als.html 
           Accessed March 7, 2015 
144 
            http://www.hughsacupuncture.com/als-treatment-by-acupuncture-and-traditional-chinese-medicine/ 
           Accessed March 7, 2015 
145 
            http://www.taoiststudy.com/content/use-qigong-herbal-medicine-achieve-cure-als 
           Accessed March 7, 2015 
146 
            Ramey D  
           Acupuncture points and meridians do not exist Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine 2001 5 143 148 
147 
            Gorski D  
           Integrative oncology: really the best of both worlds? Nature Reviews Cancer 2014 2014 692 700 
148 
            Dawidson I  
            Angmar-Mansson B  
            Blom M  
            Theodorsson E  
            Lundeberg T  
           The influence of sensory stimulation (acupuncture) on the release of neuropeptides in the saliva of healthy subjects Life Sci 1998 63 659 674 9718095 
149 
            Yu JS  
            Zeng BY  
            Hsieh CL  
           Acupuncture stimulation and neuroendocrine regulation Int Rev Neurobiol 2013 111 125 140 24215920 
150 
            Han J-S  
           Acupuncture and endorphins Neurosci Lett 2004 361 236 240 
151 
            Lee HJ  
            Lee JH  
            Lee EO  
             
           Substance P and beta-endorphin mediate electro-acupuncture induced analgesia in mouse cancer pain model J Exp Clin Cancer Res 2009 28 102 19607689 
152 
            Eisenstein T  
           Opioids and the immune system: what is their role? Br J Pharmacol 2011 16 1826 1828 21627636 
153 
            Panerai AE  
            Radulovic J  
            Monastra G  
            Manfredi B  
            Locatelli L  
            Sacerdote P  
           Beta-endorphin concentrations in brain areas and peritoneal marcrophages in rats susceptible and resistant to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis: a possible relationship between tumor necrosis factor alpha and opioids in the disease J Neuroimmunol 1994 51 169 176 7514185 
154 
            McCarthy L  
            Wetzel M  
            Sliker JK  
            Eisenstein TK  
            Rogers TJ  
           Opioids, opioid receptors and the immune response Drug Alcohol Depend 2001 62 111 123 11245967 
155 
            Murdock BJ  
            Bender DE  
            Segal BM  
            Feldman EL  
           The dual roles of immunity and ALS: injury overrides protection Neurobiol Dis 2015 77 1 12 25726748 
156 
            Hooten KG  
            Beers DR  
            Zhao W  
            Appel SH  
           Protective and toxic neuroinflammation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Neurotherapeutics 2015 1 8 Epub ahead of print 
157 
            Napadow V  
            Makris N  
            Liu J  
            Kettner NW  
            Kwong KK  
            Hui KKS  
           Effects of electroacupuncture versus manual acupuncture on the human brain as measured by fMRI Hum Brain Map 2005 24 193 205 
158 
            Wu MT  
            Sheen JM  
            Chuang KH  
             
           Neuronal specificity of acupuncture response: an fMRI study with electroacupuncture Neuroimage 2002 16 1028 1037 12202090 
159 
            Fang JL  
            Krings T  
            Weidemann J  
            Meister IG  
            Thron A  
           Functional MRI in healthy subjects during acupuncture; different effects of needle rotation in real and false acupoints Neuroradiology 2004 46 359 362 15103431 
160 
            Cho ZH  
            Chung SC  
            Jones JP  
             
           New findings of the correlation between acupoints and corresponding brain cortices using functional MRI Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1998 95 2670 2673 9482945 
161 Acupoint-specific fMRI patterns in human brain Neurosci Lett 2005 383 236 240 15876491 
162 
            Zillstra F  
            van den Berg-de-Lange I  
            Huygen F  
            Klein J  
           Anti-inflammatory actions of acupuncture Mediators of Inflammation 2003 12 59 69 12775355 
163 
            Kim ST  
            Doo AR  
            Kim SRN  
            Kim SY  
            Kim YY  
            Kim JH  
            Lee H  
            Park HJ  
           Acupuncture suppresses kainic acid-induced neuronal death and inflammatory events in mouse hippocampus J Physiol Sci 2012 62 377 383 22773088 
164 
            Yang E  
            Jiang J  
            Lee S  
            Hwang H  
            Lee M  
            Choi S  
           Electroacupuncture reduces neuroinflammatory responses in symptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model J Neuroimm 2010 223 84 91 
165 
            Jiang J  
            Yang E  
            Baek M  
            Kim S  
            Lee S  
            Choi S  
           Anti-inflammatory effects of electroacupuncture in the respiratory system of a symptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model Neurodegenerative Dis 2011 8 504 514 
166 
            Chapman C  
            Benedetti C  
            Colpitts Y  
            Gerlach R  
           Naloxone fails to reverse pain thresholds elevated by acupuncture Pain 1983 16 13 31 6866539 
167 
            Lam M  
            Galvin R  
            Curry P  
           Effectiveness of acupuncture for nonspecific chronic low back pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis Spine (Phila Pa 1976) 2013 38 2124 2138 24026151 
168 
            Wilke J  
            Vogt L  
            Niederer D  
             
           Short-term effects of acupuncture and stretching on myofascial trigger point pain of the neck: a blinded, placebo-controlled RCT Complement Ther Med 2014 22 835 841 25440373 
169 
            Crespin DJ  
            Griffin KH  
            Johnson JR  
             
           Acupuncture Provides Short-Term Pain Relief for Patients in a Total Joint Replacement Program Pain Med 2015 
170 
            Iacobone M  
            Citton M  
            Zanella S  
             
           The effects of acupuncture after thyroid surgery: A randomized, controlled trial Surgery 2014 156 1605 1612 discussion 1612–1603 25456960 
171 
            Lim SM  
            Yoo J  
            Lee E  
            Kim HJ  
            Shin S  
            Han G  
            Ahn HS  
           Acupuncture for spasticity after stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized conrolled trials Evid Based Complement Altern Med 2015 Epub ahead of print 
172 
            Yang E  
            Jiang J  
            Lee S  
            Hwang H  
            Lee M  
            Choi S  
           Electroacupuncture reduces neuroinflammatory responses in symptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model J Neuroimm 2010 223 84 91 
173 
            Lee S  
            Kim S  
           The effects of sa-am acupuncture treatment on respiratory parameters in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Evidence Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2013 2013 506317 24101939 
174 
            Yongde C  
           Formulating a therapeutic program with the governing vessel in treating 46 cases of ALS Shanghai Journal of Moxibustion 1998 17 43 
175 
            Yongde C  
           Clinical observation on 46 cases of ALS in consideration of the treatment principal breaking through the Dumai Zhejiang Journal of Integrating Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine 1999 9 16 17 
176 
            http://www.itmonline.org/arts/als.htm 
           Accessed March 19, 2015 
177 
            Liang S  
            Christner D  
            DuLaux S  
            Laurent D  
           Significant neurological improvement in two patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis after 4 weeks of treatment with acupuncture injection point therapy using enercel J Acupunct Meridian Stud 2011 4 257 261 22196509 
178 ALSUntangled Group ALSUntangled 28: Acupuncture Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 2015 Submitted 
179 
            http://www.patientslikeme.com/treatment_evaluations/browse?brand=f&amp;condition_id=9&amp;id=213-acupuncture-side-effects-and-efficacy 
           Accessed March 21, 2015 
180 
            Ernst E  
            Zhang J  
           Cardiac tamponade caused by acupuncture: a review of the literature Int J Cardiol 2011 149 287 289 21093944 
181 
            Demir M  
            Oruc M  
            Dalli A  
            Kaya H  
            Karadeniz G  
           A rare complication of acupuncture: pneumothorax Tuberk Toraks 2014 62 316 318 25581696 
182 
            Ernst E  
            Sherman KJ  
           Is acupuncture a risk factor for hepatitis? Systematic review of epidemiological studies J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2003 18 1231 1236 14535978 
183 
            White A  
            Hayhoe S  
            Hart A  
            Ernst E  
           Adverse events following acupuncture: a prospective survey of 32000 consultations with doctors and physiotherapists BMJ 2001 323 485 486 11532840 
184 
            Melchart D  
            Weidenhammer W  
            Streng A  
             
           Prospective investigation of adverse events in 97,733 patients Arch Intern Med 2004 164 104 105 14718331 
185 
            MacPherson H  
            Scullion A  
            Thomas KJ  
            Walters S  
           Patient reports of adverse events associated with acupuncture treatment: a prospective national survey Qual Saf Health Care 2004 13 349 355 15465938 
186 
            Villarruz MV  
            Dans A  
            Tan F  
           Chelation therapy for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002 
187 
            Seely DM  
            Wu P  
            Mills EJ  
           EDTA chelation therapy for cardiovascular disease: a systematic review BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2005 11 1 5 32 16262904 
188 
            Sutedja NA  
            Veldink JH  
            Fischer K  
            Kromhout H  
            Heederik D  
            Huisman MH  
            Wokke JH  
            van den Berg LH  
           Exposure to chemicals and metals and risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a systematic review Amyotroph Lateral Scler 2009 Oct-Dec 10 5–6 302 9 19922117 
189 
            Callaghan B  
            Feldman D  
            Gruis K  
            Feldman E  
           The association of exposure to lead, mercury, and selenium in the development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and the epigenetic implications Neurodegener Dis 2011 8 1 8 20689252 
190 
            Praline J  
            Guennoc AM  
            Limousin N  
            Hallak H  
            de Toffol B  
            Corcia P  
           ALS and mercury intoxication: a relationship? Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2007 12 109 10 880 3 17719172 
191 
            Couratier P  
            Bernet-Bernady P  
            Truong T  
            Lagrange E  
            Preux PM  
            Lachatre G  
            Vallat JM  
           Lead intoxication and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis] Rev Neurol (Paris) 1998 5 154 4 345 7 9773065 
192 
            Louwerse ES  
            Buchet JP  
            Van Dijk MA  
            de Jong VJ  
            Lauwerys RR  
           Urinary excretion of lead and mercury after oral administration of meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid in patients with motor neurone disease Int Arch Occup Environ Health 1995 67 2 135 8 7672858 
193 
            http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5508a3.htm 
           Accessed March 25, 2015 
194 
            Cleland JA  
            Price DB  
            Lee AJ  
            Gerard S  
            Sharma A  
           A pragmatic, three-arm randomised controlled trial of spiritual healing for asthma in primary care Br J Gen Pract 2006 6 56 527 444 9 16762126 
195 
            Benson H  
            Dusek JA  
            Sherwood JB  
            Lam P  
            Bethea CF  
            Carpenter W  
            Levitsky S  
            Hill PC  
            Clem DW Jr  
            Jain MK  
            Drumel D  
            Kopecky SL  
            Mueller PS  
            Marek D  
            Rollins S  
            Hibberd PL  
           Study of the Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer (STEP) in cardiac bypass patients: a multicenter randomized trial of uncertainty and certainty of receiving intercessory prayer Am Heart J 2006 4 151 4 934 42 16569567 
196 
            O’Mathúna DP  
            Ashford RL  
           Therapeutic touch for healing acute wounds Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014 7 29 7 CD002766 25069726 
197 
            Kundu A  
            Lin Y  
            Oron AP  
            Doorenbos AZ  
           Reiki therapy for postoperative oral pain in pediatric patients: pilot data from a double-blind, randomized clinical trial Complement Ther Clin Pract 2014 2 20 1 21 5 24439640 
198 
            FitzHenry F  
            Wells N  
            Slater V  
            Dietrich MS  
            Wisawatapnimit P  
            Chakravarthy AB  
           A randomized placebo-controlled pilot study of the impact of healing touch on fatigue in breast cancer patients undergoing radiation therapy Integr Cancer Ther 2014 3 13 2 105 13 24105358 
199 
            Johnston C  
            Campbell-Yeo M  
            Rich B  
            Whitley J  
            Filion F  
            Cogan J  
            Walker CD  
           Therapeutic touch is not therapeutic for procedural pain in very preterm neonates: a randomized trial Clin J Pain 2013 9 29 9 824 9 23817594 
200 Alsuntangled Group ALSUntangled 12: Dean Kraft, Energy Healer Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 2011 12 389 391 21981685 
201 
            Miyoshi K  
            Ohyagi Y  
            Amano T  
            Inoue I  
            Miyoshi S  
            Tsui S  
             
           A patient with motor neuron syndrome clinically similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis presenting a spontaneous recovery Rinsho Sinkigaku 2000 40 1090 1095 
202 
            Tsai CP  
            Ho HH  
            Yen DJ  
            Wang V  
            Lin KP  
            Liao KK  
            Wu Z  
           Reversible motor neuron disease Eur Neurol 1993 33 387 389 8243516 
203 
            Tucker T  
            Layzer R  
            Miller R  
            Chad D  
           Subacute, reversible motor neuron disease Neurology 1991 41 1541 1544 1844350 
204 
            Ernst E  
           Distant healing--an “update” of a systematic review Wien Klin Wochenschr 2003 4 30 115 7–8 241 5 12778776 
205 
            Ernst E  
           Complementary treatment: who cares how it works, as long as it does? Lancet Oncol 2005 3 6 3 131 2 15737827 
206 
            Ernst E  
           Spiritual healing: more than meets the eye J Pain Symptom Manage 2006 11 32 5 393 5 17085260 
207 
            Emanuel E  
            Emanuel L  
           Four models of the physician-patient relationship JAMA 1992 267 2221 2226 1556799 
208 
            O’Brien MR  
           Information-seeking behavior among people with motor neuron disease British Journal of Nursing 2004 13 964 968 15389139 
209 
            Osman H  
           History and development of the doctrine of informed consent IEJHE 2001 4 41 47 
210 
            Bedlack R  
            Hardiman O  
           ALSUntangled: a scientific approach to off-label treatment options for patients with ALS using tweets and twitters Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 2009 3 129 130 19455452 
211 
            Deber R  
            Kraetschmer N  
            Urowitz S  
            Sharpe N  
           Do people want to be autonomous patients? Preferred roles in treatment decision-making in several patient populations Health Expectations 2007 3 248 258 17678513 
212 
            Murray E  
            Pollck L  
            White M  
            Lo B  
           Clinical decision-making: physicians’ preferences and experiences BMC Family Practice 2007 8 10 17362517 
213 
            Joosten E  
            DeFuentes-Merillas L  
            de Weert G  
            Sensky T  
            van der Staak C  
            de Jong C  
           Systematic review of the effects of shared decision-making on patient satisfaction, treatment adherence and health status Psychother Psychosom 2008 77 219 226 18418028 
214 The ALSUntangled Group ALSUntangled: Introducing the Table of Evidence Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration 2015 16 142 145 25544643 

