LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   951006721632Health PlaceHealth PlaceHealth &amp; place1353-82921873-205424200470494866510.1016/j.healthplace.2013.09.015EMS68145ArticleDietary inequalities: what is the evidence for the effect of the
neighbourhood food environment? Black Christina abMoon Graham cBaird Janis aa Medical Research Council Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit
(University of Southampton), Southampton General Hospital Tremona Road, Southampton
SO16 6YD Englandb NIHR Doctoral Research Fellowc Geography and Environment University of Southampton,
University Road, Southampton SO17 1BJ EnglandCorresponding author: Christina Black, Address: MRC Lifecourse
Epidemiology Unit (University of Southampton), Southampton General Hospital
Tremona Road, Southampton SO16 6YD England, Ph: +44 23 8076 4042, Fax: +44 23
80704021, cb@mrc.soton.ac.uk21 6 2016 17 10 2013 5 2014 18 7 2016 27 229 242 This file is available to download for the purposes of text mining, consistent with the principles of UK copyright law.This review summarises the evidence for inequalities in community and
consumer nutrition environments from ten previous review articles, and also
assesses the evidence for the effect of the community and consumer nutrition
environments on dietary intake. There is evidence for inequalities in food
access in the US but trends are less apparent in other developed countries.
There is a trend for greater access and availability to healthy and less healthy
foods relating to better and poorer dietary outcomes respectively. Trends for
price show that higher prices of healthy foods are associated with better
dietary outcomes. More nuanced measures of the food environment, including
multi-dimensional and individualised approaches, would enhance the state of the
evidence and help inform future interventions.


   Background
Socioeconomic disparities in dietary quality exist in developed countries
across the globe (Ball et al. 2004;Ecob et al.
2000;Robinson et al. 2004) and are
contributing to the inequitable distribution of conditions such as obesity and
cardiovascular disease (Fox et al. 2011;McLaren
2007;Mente et al. 2009). Dietary
intake is recognised as a complex behaviour of multi-factorial origin, whereby
individual and environmental factors interact to influence what people eat (Foresight 2007;Story et al. 2008). Areas with little or no provision of healthy foods
are believed to contribute to disparities in diet-related conditions such as obesity
and diabetes, particularly in the United States (US) (Larson et al. 2009;Walker et
al. 2010).

There is growing evidence that the neighbourhood food environment is an
important determinant of dietary behaviour and obesity (Giskes et al. 2011;Holsten
2009;Lovasi et al. 2009) and an
increasing consensus over the need to adapt the environment to make healthy choices
easier, particularly for individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds (Department of Health UK 2010). Recent
recommendations from the United Nations stressed the need for member states to
provide equitable access and availability to foods that contribute to a healthy diet
and discourage the production and promotion of foods that contribute to an unhealthy
diet (United Nations General Assembly
2012).

The literature examining associations between neighbourhood environmental
factors and socio-economic indicators or diet has grown in recent years (Caspi et al. 2012b). The neighbourhood food
environment literature has tried to address many different research questions using
a variety of different outcome and exposure measures and very few valid or reliable
measures (Charreire et al. 2010;Gustafson et al. 2012;McKinnon et al. 2009b). This diversity in methodologies
combined with the ecological design of the vast majority of studies has made
interpreting this body of literature challenging within the standard systematic
review paradigm.

As a result, previous reviews of the evidence have made recommendations for
further research rather than concise conclusions about the strength or range of
effect sizes of the current evidence base (Caspi,
Sorensen, Subramanian, &amp; Kawachi 2012b;Giskes, van Lenthe, Avendano-Pabon, &amp; Brug 2011;Gustafson, Hankins, &amp; Jilcott 2012;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Walker, Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). This
paper offers the first synthesis of previous review articles to determine the
evidence for socioeconomic disparities in the neighbourhood food environment and
explores the potential for quantifying the relationship between the food environment
and dietary inequalities.

Organising the evidence
Leading academics in the food environment field have called for research to
use conceptual models that theorise and test the mechanisms by which specific
environmental exposures interact with individual factors to influence health
behaviours such as diet (Cummins 2007;McKinnon et al. 2009a;Oakes et al. 2009). A widely used model of the food environment
is that of Glanz et al in 2005 (Figure 1). It considers the policy,
environmental, social and individual determinants of diet. The model links dietary
behaviour directly to a collection of three settings: community nutrition
environment, consumer nutrition environment and organisational nutrition
environment. The model also suggests that the effect of these settings
plus a fourth setting, the information environment (media and
advertising), may be moderated or mediated by demographic, psychosocial or perceived
environmental factors.

Most of the food environment research to date has focused on the
community nutrition environment (Caspi, Sorensen, Subramanian, &amp; Kawachi 2012b;Thornton et al. 2010b) which measures the
accessibility of food sources in the context of residential neighbourhoods. These
studies use Geographic Information Systems (GIS) or other methods to determine the
geospatial location of food sources to measure accessibility in terms of outlet
proximity, density and to lesser extent diversity (Charreire, Casey, Salze, Simon, Chaix, Banos, Badariotti, Weber, &amp;
Oppert 2010;McKinnon, Reedy, Morrissette,
Lytle, &amp; Yaroch 2009b). Proximity assesses the minimum distance
between food outlet and residence or proxy location, using road network, Euclidean
distance or travel time. Density quantifies the availability of different types of
food outlets within a specific area such as census tracts or buffer zones around
centroid, home or food outlet. Density calculations may include total count, count
per population, per square area or kernel density estimation (density calculation
weighted by distance from origin). Diversity measures the different types of outlets
for example the number of different fast food outlets.

The consumer nutrition environment reflects factors that
consumers encounter within a retail food outlet such as the types of food available,
price, promotions, placement, range of choice, freshness or quality and nutrition
information. Assessment of the in-store environment typically requires internal
audits by observation using a checklist or market basket tool (McKinnon, Reedy, Morrissette, Lytle, &amp; Yaroch 2009b). A
range of such tools have been developed where the majority measure product
availability and price. A smaller number of tools consider additional factors such
as product quality or variety (Gustafson, Hankins,
&amp; Jilcott 2012). Fewer studies have explored consumer nutrition
environment factors probably due to the time and financial costs associated with
collecting and analysing such data (Thornton
&amp; Kavanagh 2010b).

The organisational nutrition environment refers to specific
institutional settings where defined groups of people consume food such as workplace
cafeterias or children’s centres, churches and healthcare facilities. The
nutrition environment of these institutions has long been identified as an important
determinant of health whereby the ethos, policies and practices of the setting can
heavily influence an individual’s beliefs and behaviours including food
choices (McLeroy et al. 1988). To date the
role of organisational nutrition environments have rarely been considered in reviews
of the food environment literature. However, these settings can play an important
part of an individual’s day-to-day life and form part of their food
environment exposure.

This paper uses the model by Glanz and colleagues to structure a review of
the literature with a key focus on identifying the evidence for the role of the food
environment on dietary inequalities. This review is restricted to research conducted
in developed nations, on adults aged 18-60 years and does not cover literature on
the organisational nutrition environment. More specifically, the review i)
summarises the evidence for neighbourhood disparities in community and consumer
nutrition environments from previous review articles, and ii) assesses the evidence
for the effect on dietary intake.

Methods
In order to summarise the evidence for neighbourhood disparities in
community and consumer nutrition environments previous semi-systematic and
systematic review articles assessing this literature were identified and
synthesised. A literature search for reviews was completed in January 2013 using
Medline and Web of Science databases using the search terms ‘review’
and ‘food environment’. A total of 123 articles were reviewed. After
screening and analysis a total of ten papers were found to have reviewed the
findings of studies investigating neighbourhood disparities in the community and
consumer nutrition environments. Review papers that described methods for assessing
the food environment were excluded. Collectively these 10 review articles considered
research on the community and consumer nutrition environment to early 2011.
Additional original research papers recently published were also considered to
present examples of more recent evidence.

To answer the second aim of the paper, and assess the evidence for an effect
of the community and consumer nutrition environments on dietary intake, a literature
search was performed in in November 2012 and again in September 2013 using Medline,
Embase, AMED and PsycArticles, and Web of Science databases. Both MeSH and free
terms were applied including ‘environmental medicine’ (MeSH),
‘food stores’, ‘food outlet’, ‘food
price’, ‘food availability’, ‘food promotions’,
‘food habits’ (MeSH), ‘diet’,
‘consumption’ and ‘intake’. A total of 3943 articles
were returned in November 2012. After screening abstracts and removing duplicates 59
original research articles and two review articles were identified. A further 33
articles were excluded because they did not assess the direct relationship between
objective measures of permanent food outlets and dietary outcomes in adults aged
18-60 years. An additional 21 articles were identified from the bibliographies of
relevant papers and through contact with experts in the field of food environment
research. In September 2013 nine new studies that met the inclusion criteria were
identified. Due to the heterogeneity of the exposure and outcome variables used in
these original research papers a meta-analysis could not be performed. As an
alternative, exposure measurements were tallied according to the direction of their
relationship with three common dietary outcomes: dietary quality, fruit and
vegetable intake or fast food intake. Several exposure measures from a single
article may have been included in the count. Exposure measures were grouped by store
type and key environmental variables (density, proximity, availability, price,
quality and variety). The final results were presented in tables or graphs. Similar
methods were used to summarise studies which investigated relationships between
environmental variables and diet in disadvantaged populations.

Results
Question 1: Disparities in the neighbourhood food environment
A total of ten published reviews have assessed studies investigating
differences in neighbourhood deprivation or ethnicity of the community nutrition
environment and/or the consumer nutrition environment (Beaulac et al. 2009;Black et al. 2008;Fleischhacker et al. 2011;Ford et al. 2008;Fraser et al. 2010;Gustafson, Hankins, &amp; Jilcott 2012;Hilmers et al. 2012;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Lovasi, Hutson, Guerra,
&amp; Neckerman 2009;Walker,
Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). Three articles were described as
systematic reviews (Beaulac, Kristjansson,
&amp; Cummins 2009;Fleischhacker,
Evenson, Rodriguez, &amp; Ammerman 2011;Gustafson, Hankins, &amp; Jilcott 2012) however, only
one review by Beaulac et al indicated that two independent authors had reviewed
the search results. Collectively, these reviews consider 102 original research
papers from five developed countries, which were published from 1966 to 2011.
Four of the ten review articles assessed literature solely from the US where the
bulk of the research in this field has been conducted (Ford &amp; Dzewaltowski 2008;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Lovasi, Hutson, Guerra, &amp; Neckerman 2009;Walker, Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). The
remaining six reviews took an international perspective but were limited to
research from developed nations and papers published in English. Of the 102
papers reviewed, 70 were from the US, 12 from the UK, 11 from Canada, seven from
Australia and two from New Zealand. Approximately half (47%) of the studies
focused on assessing neighbourhood disparities in the community nutrition
environment, 34% on the consumer nutrition environment and 19% included measures
of both these nutrition environments. There was much overlap in original
research papers reviewed, with 41% of studies featuring in more than one review
article.

The reviews considered heterogeneity in measurements of the community
and consumer nutrition environments to be a major challenge in interpreting the
literature. A variety of definitions of neighbourhood and food outlets had been
used and a range of analyses applied for measures of food outlet density or
proximity and the availability and price of food within stores. As a result of
this heterogeneity none of the review articles were able to perform a
meta-analysis. A summary of the ten review articles is provided in Table 1 and a summary of their main
findings are described below.

Community nutrition environment
There is consensus across the nine articles reviewing the community
nutrition environment of sufficient evidence that residents of low income or
ethnic minority neighbourhoods in the US have disproportionally poorer access to
healthy foods (Beaulac, Kristjansson, &amp;
Cummins 2009;Black &amp; Macinko
2008;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson
2009;Walker, Keane, &amp; Burke
2010) and greater access to food outlets selling less healthy foods
(Black &amp; Macinko 2008;Fleischhacker, Evenson, Rodriguez, &amp;
Ammerman 2011;Fraser, Edwards, Cade,
&amp; Clarke 2010;Hilmers,
Hilmers, &amp; Dave 2012;Larson,
Story, &amp; Nelson 2009) than residents of more affluent
neighbourhoods. One review concluded that the strongest evidence for
environmental influences for socioeconomic and ethnic disparities in obesity is
the unequal access to food stores (along with access to exercise facilities and
neighbourhood safety (Lovasi, Hutson, Guerra,
&amp; Neckerman 2009). The evidence for differences in access to
healthy food by level of area deprivation from other developed nations including
Canada, Australia and the UK was equivocal (Beaulac, Kristjansson, &amp; Cummins 2009;Black &amp; Macinko 2008). However, there was more
consistent evidence for disparities in access to fast food outlets in these
countries, with greater access in more deprived neighbourhoods (Black &amp; Macinko 2008;Fleischhacker, Evenson, Rodriguez, &amp;
Ammerman 2011;Fraser, Edwards, Cade,
&amp; Clarke 2010;Hilmers,
Hilmers, &amp; Dave 2012).

The five review articles that assessed the evidence for neighbourhood
differences in fast food access found that internationally, the vast majority of
studies showed greater access to fast food outlets in neighbourhoods with higher
levels of deprivation and minority populations (Black &amp; Macinko 2008;Fleischhacker, Evenson, Rodriguez, &amp; Ammerman 2011;Fraser, Edwards, Cade, &amp; Clarke
2010;Hilmers, Hilmers, &amp; Dave
2012;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson
2009).

The United States
The four review articles which assessed the evidence for spatial
disparities in grocery store access found consistent trends for low-income
and ethnic communities in the United States having fewer supermarkets per
capita and farther distances to travel to the closest store than more
affluent communities (Beaulac, Kristjansson,
&amp; Cummins 2009;Black
&amp; Macinko 2008;Larson,
Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Walker, Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). For example, research
assessing the national distribution of supermarkets by zip codes showed that
residents in low income neighbourhoods had only 75% as many chain
supermarkets as middle income neighbourhoods (Powell et al. 2007b). There were also differences in
access according to ethnicity, with the availability of chain supermarkets
in neighbourhoods with higher proportions of black residents roughly half
that in predominantly white neighbourhoods. Similarly research from Detroit,
which investigated distance to closest supermarket from census tracts
centroid, showed the nearest supermarket was at a significantly greater
distance from people’s homes in the most impoverished areas
(&gt;17% in poverty) compared with the least impoverished areas
(&lt;5% in poverty) (Zenk et al.
2005). Furthermore, the most impoverished black areas were 1.1
miles futher from the closest supermarket than the most impoverished white
areas. A more recent study in a Texan county however, found that percent
Latino in the neighbourhood was not associated with access to supermarkets,
grocery stores or specialty stores but there was an association with
exposure to convenience stores (Lisabeth et
al. 2010). This brief summary suggests, as noted in the review by
Black et al (Black &amp; Macinko
2008), that there is evidence in the US that neighbourhood
environmental factors may be inhibiting residents of more disadvantaged
communities from making health dietary choices.

In the United States a national study that examined the distribution
of food service outlets in more than 28,000 zip codes, found lower income
neighbourhoods had 1.2 and 1.3 times the number of full service and fast
food outlets of higher income neighbourhoods respectively (Powell et al. 2007a). These disparities
were observed after adjustment for population density, urbanisation and
region. Research from New York City highlights how black communities are
disproportionally affected by fast food access with results showing that the
prevalence of fast food outlets was positively associated with percentage of
black residents (Kwate et al. 2009).
This association was stronger than the association with median household
income such that high income black neighbourhoods had similar exposure to
fast food outlets as low income black neighbourhoods. A more recent study,
included in one review article (Hilmers,
Hilmers, &amp; Dave 2012), applied a novel approach to
assessing food outlet accessibility by creating an index that considered
density of supermarkets, convenience stores selling healthy foods and fast
food outlets in census blocks (Gordon et al.
2011). Results showed that predominantly black neighbourhoods had
poorer food access scores while predominantly Latino and white
neighbourhoods had better food access scores. Additionally, neighbourhoods
with the highest median income had better food access scores compared with
the lowest income neighbourhoods.

Other developed nations
Grocery store access studies from other developed nations including
Australia, Canada and the UK have not consistently identified disparities in
access to supermarkets and grocery stores among neighbourhoods of varied
socioeconomic status (Beaulac, Kristjansson,
&amp; Cummins 2009;Black
&amp; Macinko 2008) and very few studies have reported
differences by the ethnic composition. For example, research from Melbourne,
Australia, has shown that geographical access to supermarkets and fruit and
vegetable stores was better for those living in more advantaged
neighbourhoods (Ball et al. 2009).
This finding was consistent across three measures of access: count within a
two kilometre buffer of home, density per 10, 000 residents and closest
proximity via road network. Another study from Melbourne, however, found
that although more advantaged areas had closer access to supermarkets, most
residents (&gt;80%) lived within an 8-10 minute car journey of a major
supermarket suggesting most people had good access to healthy food (Burns et
al. 2007). Similarly, research in Brisbane, Australia, demonstrated no
differences in shopping infrastructure according to the socioeconomic status
of census districts (Winkler et al.
2006b). In Canada, research conducted in Edmonton revealed few
differences in supermarket access across neighbourhoods of differing
socioeconomic status or proportion of Aboriginal residents (Smoyer-Tomic et al. 2008). Furthermore,
research in British Columbia and Quebec has shown that supermarkets
pre-dominated low income neighbourhoods (Apparicio et al. 2007;Black et
al. 2011), while in Ontario, lower income neighbourhoods were
predominated by convenience stores (Latham et al. 2007). The evidence from
the UK is also mixed. Assessment of the community nutrition environment in
Wales and Northern England has shown poorer access to supermarkets in poorer
areas (Clarke et al. 2002). Research
in Glasgow, however, has shown little difference by neighbourhood
deprivation (Macdonald et al. 2009)
or better access to supermarkets in more deprived neighbourhoods (Cummins et
al. 2002). Nation-wide research in Sweden, that was not included in the
review articles, revealed that neighbourhoods of high deprivation have a
greater prevalence of supermarkets and grocery stores than less deprived
neighbourhoods (Kawakami et al.
2011). These results provide further indication that food access
issues, which appear to be importance predictors of inequalities in the US,
may be less apparent in other developed countries.

Socioeconomic trends in fast food access in other developed
countries have been reasonably consistent with trends observed in the US
(Black &amp; Macinko 2008).
Only three studies, from Canada and the UK, have shown no association
between level of neighbourhood deprivation and fast food access (Fleischhacker, Evenson, Rodriguez, &amp;
Ammerman 2011;Fraser, Edwards,
Cade, &amp; Clarke 2010). In Australia for example, research
in Melbourne has shown, that residents of the poorest neighbourhoods lived
closer, and had up to 2.5 times more exposure to fast food outlets, than
people living in wealthier neighbourhoods (Burns &amp; Inglis 2007;Reidpath et al. 2002). In Edmonton, Canada, poorer
neighbourhoods, as well as those with higher percentages of Aboriginal
residents, had greater access to fast food outlets than more affluent
neighbourhoods (Smoyer-Tomic, Spence, Raine,
Amrhein, Cameron, Yasenovskiy, Cutumisu, Hemphill, &amp; Healy
2008). This association remained after adjusting for supermarket
proximity to residents’ homes. Research from the UK has shown a
positive linear relationship between the density per 1000 population of
McDonald’s and other chain fast food outlets and neighbourhood
deprivation such that fast food outlets were more prevalent in poorer areas
(Cummins et al. 2005b;Macdonald et al. 2007). However,
investigations including all out-of-home eating outlets in Glasgow showed
the density was highest in neighbourhoods of the second most affluent
quintile (Macintyre et al. 2005). A
recent study assessing facilities across Sweden revealed results consistent
with the international trend showing higher prevalence of fast food outlets
in more deprived neighbourhoods (Kawakami,
Winkleby, Skog, Szulkin, &amp; Sundquist 2011).

Consumer nutrition environment
Six review articles appraised neighbourhood disparities in the consumer
nutrition environment literature, three with an international perspective (Beaulac, Kristjansson, &amp; Cummins
2009;Black &amp; Macinko
2008;Gustafson, Hankins, &amp;
Jilcott 2012) and three focused on literature from the US (Ford &amp; Dzewaltowski 2008;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Walker, Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). Ford
et al (Ford &amp; Dzewaltowski 2008)
concluded that consumer nutrition environment studies revealed weaker
associations between in-store variables and area deprivation than community
nutrition environment studies that used store type as a proxy for healthy food
(larger stores having greater availability and cheaper prices). However, the
authors also stated that consumer nutrition environment studies are important
because they allow for critical differences in availability, price and quality
to be observed (Ford &amp; Dzewaltowski
2008).

The United States
There is some evidence for neighbourhood disparities in the
availability of healthier foods in the United States but the evidence for
price is less robust (Beaulac, Kristjansson,
&amp; Cummins 2009;Ford
&amp; Dzewaltowski 2008;Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Walker, Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). For example,
results from in-store surveys in two socioeconomic and ethnically
contrasting cities in Alabama revealed that the more disadvantaged city had
a dominance of convenience stores which stocked few healthy foods. The more
affluent city had no convenience stores and several chain supermarkets which
offered a large variety of healthy food options and lower price ranges for
some fruit and vegetables (Bovell-Benjamin
et al. 2009). In contrast, survey results from grocery stores in
two socio-economically and ethnically contrasting cities in Chicago showed
that store prices were cheaper in the poorer community (Block et al. 2006).

Other developed countries
In other developed countries the evidence is equivocal (Beaulac, Kristjansson, &amp; Cummins
2009;Gustafson, Hankins, &amp;
Jilcott 2012). In Australia, research in Brisbane showed no
differences in fruit and vegetable price or availability by level of
neighbourhood deprivation (Winkler et al.
2006a). In-store surveys in Melbourne however, revealed that
fruit and vegetable availability slightly favoured more affluent
neighbourhoods but food prices were cheaper in more deprived neighbourhoods
(Ball, Timperio, &amp; Crawford
2009). Cheaper food prices in poorer areas have also been
observed in Canada (Latham &amp; Moffat
2007) and the UK (Cummins
&amp; Macintyre 2002;Cummins
et al. 2010).

Although limited and reviewed in only one article, evidence has
consistently shown poorer quality produce in more deprived neighbourhoods
(Gustafson, Hankins, &amp; Jilcott
2012). A recent study from the UK revealed that residents of the
most deprived neighbourhoods had 69-76% greater risk of poor quality fruit
and vegetables than residents of more affluent neighbourhoods (Black et al. 2012). The small body of
evidence assessing the consumer nutrition environment in food service
outlets, reviewed in only one article, revealed that restaurants in more
affluent areas offer more healthy menu options than low income areas (Larson, Story, &amp; Nelson 2009).
The current evidence for socioeconomic neighbourhood differences in the
consumer nutrition environment suggests that the relationship between the
availability and price of healthy food and area deprivation is complex and
context dependent (Ford &amp;
Dzewaltowski 2008). Variations in the foods assessed in stores
and exclusion of in-store factors such as marketing and product placement
limits the ability of the current body of evidence to determine whether
neighbourhood differences in the consumer nutrition environment contribute
to dietary inequalities (Gustafson, Hankins,
&amp; Jilcott 2012).

Question 2: The neighbourhood food environment and dietary quality
In the search for evidence of a relationship between the community and
consumer nutrition environments and dietary outcomes two systematic reviews were
identified. Caspi et al (Caspi, Sorensen,
Subramanian, &amp; Kawachi 2012b) completed a systematic review of
articles published prior to March 2011 which investigated a relationship between
neighbourhood food environment exposures and diet. A total of 38 empirical
studies were identified, 26 of which measured the relationship between objective
community or consumer nutrition environment exposures and dietary outcomes in
adults aged 18-60 years. More than two-thirds of the articles (n=26) used
geographical exposure data to measure community nutrition environment against
dietary outcomes. Gustafson et al (Gustafson,
Hankins, &amp; Jilcott 2012) systematically reviewed literature
investigating the consumer nutrition environment of food stores from 2000 to
2011. A total of six articles that assessed the relationship between objective
consumer nutrition environment exposures and diet in adults aged 18-60 years
were identified. One article (Hermstad et al.
2010) was additional those identified by Caspi et al, however, has
not been included in our review because multiple community and consumer
nutrition environment variables were combined in a model, making direct
comparison with other original research papers not possible.

The literature search for the present paper identified a further 27
articles (Ball et al. 2006;Boone-Heinonen et al. 2011;Burgoine et al. 2009;Burgoine et al. 2011;Casagrande et al. 2011;Caspi et al.
2012a;Duffey et al. 2010;Dunn et al. 2012;Fuller et al. 2013;Gordon-Larsen et al. 2011;Gustafson
et al. 2013a;Gustafson et al.
2013b;Hickson et al.
2011;Jack et al. 2013;Layte et al. 2011;Macdonald et al. 2011;Minaker et al. 2013;Monsivais et al.
2012;Murakami et al.
2010;Ollberding et al.
2012;Rehm et al. 2011;Richardson et al. 2011;Robinson et al. 2013;Sadler et al. 2013;Sharkey
et al. 2011;Thornton et al.
2012;White et al. 2004) in
addition to those identified by Caspi et al and Gustafson et al. Grey literature
identified from the bibliographies of relevant papers were included in this
review however the grey literature was not systematically reviewed. All
identified literature was reviewed by only one reviewer. The findings from the
two systematic reviews and a summary of the original research papers
investigating the neighbourhood food environment and dietary outcomes is
provided below for the community and consumer nutrition environments
respectively.

Community nutrition environment and dietary quality
A total of 31 articles, involving adults aged 18-60 years, measured
access to food stores using measures of density. These studies tested whether
(a) increased access to food stores selling healthy foods such as supermarkets/
greengrocers is associated with better dietary outcomes and/or (b) increased
access to outlets selling less healthy foods like fast food outlets is
associated with poorer dietary outcomes. The majority of these studies (n=20)
identified at least one significant association between geographical density and
their diet in the expected direction. Two studies assessed the ratio of number
of healthy food outlets to less healthy food outlets (Retail Food Environment
Index) within a specified boundary but found no association between overall
retail exposure and diet(Gustafson, Christian,
Lewis, Moore, &amp; Jilcott 2013a;Minaker, Raine, Wild, Nykiforuk, Thompson, &amp; Frank 2013). A
total of 24 articles, involving adults aged 18-60 years, examined distance to
nearest food outlet from participant’s home or proxy location. Thirteen
of these papers revealed no association between proximity and diet. One study
investigated fast food chain diversity and showed that increased numbers of
different fast food outlets were linked with higher fast food intake (Thornton et al. 2009).

Summaries of the findings from the 42 original research papers
investigating a relationship between community nutrition environment exposures
and diet are presented in Figures 2-5. Around a quarter of the density findings
provide evidence for expected associations: food stores selling healthy foods
(supermarkets, grocery stores and green grocers) related to better dietary
outcomes (27%) and less healthy food stores related to poorer dietary outcomes
(22%). Approximately one fifth of the proximity findings provide for an
association between healthier food stores and better dietary outcomes (20%) and
even fewer indicate an association between less healthy food outlets and poorer
dietary outcomes (13%). Very similar trends were observed in the few studies
(n=9) that focused analyses on disadvantaged populations. More than a quarter of
the density findings showed an association between density of healthier food
stores and better dietary outcomes while, nearly a fifth showed evidence of an
association between closer proximity to healthier food stores and better dietary
outcomes. No relationships were observed between proximity of convenience stores
and diet in disadvantaged populations however, proximity to fast food outlets
was associated with higher fast food intake in the one study identified (Dunn, Sharkey, &amp; Horel 2012). The
evidence for the community nutrition environment shows a trend toward expected
associations however the majority of findings reported no association. There is
some variation by global regions which is discussed further below.

The United States
The majority of studies have been conducted in United States (n=24).
This literature provides the strongest evidence of all regions for a
relationship between community nutrition environment exposures and dietary
outcomes with almost two thirds showing significant associations
(p&lt;0.05) in the expected direction. Better access to supermarkets and
green grocers was associated with healthier dietary behaviours in ten
studies. However, a further eleven studies revealed no significant
associations. Two studies revealed negative associations between fruit and
vegetable intake and the density of small grocery stores and convenience
stores which are known to offer poorer availability of healthy foods (Gustafson et al. 2011;Powell et al. 2009). For example,
Powell et al (Powell, Zhao, &amp; Wang
2009) showed that each additional grocery store per 10,000 capita
was associated with an approximate 3% decrease in weekly fruit and vegetable
consumption (p=0.05). This study by Powell et al also showed that each
additional fast food outlet per 10,000 capita was associated with an
approximate 5% decrease in fruit and vegetable consumption. However, the
evidence for a relationship between fast food access and fast food intake in
the US is mixed with four of the nine studies showing mixed results and
three returning null or unexpected findings. Results from a longitudinal
study stratifying the sample by gender found no association between fast
food outlet density and fast food consumption in women. For males however,
1% increase in access to fast food outlets within a 1km and 1-3km radius
from home corresponded with modest increases in monthly fast food intake of
0.13% and 0.34% respectively (Boone-Heinonen, Gordon-Larsen, Kiefe, Shikany, Lewis, &amp; Popkin
2011). The evidence suggests that while some inconsistency exists
in the literature there is weak evidence for a relationship between
community nutrition environment exposures and dietary outcomes in the
US.

Canada
One comprehensive study in Ontario, Canada, has assessed the
relationship between food access and diet (Minaker, Raine, Wild, Nykiforuk, Thompson, &amp; Frank 2013).
This study measured multiple aspects of the community nutrition environment
including road network distance to nearest grocery store, convenience store
and fast food outlet, total store and restaurant density within one
kilometre of home, and the ratio of healthy to unhealthy stores and
restaurants. Analyses were stratified by gender and results revealed not one
significant relationship. These lack of findings suggest that in Canada,
diet quality is not influenced by access to food stores and restaurants
however, clear conclusions cannot be drawn from a single study.

Australasia
A total of eight articles were identified from the Australasia
region: four from Australia, two from New Zealand and two from Japan. The
outcomes from these papers are largely equivocal, with several studies
revealing mixed results. For example, the SESAW study from Australia found
that density of supermarkets per 10,000 residents (Ball, Crawford, &amp; Mishra 2006) and within 2km
radius of low-income women’s homes (Williams et al. 2010) was not associated with fruit and
vegetable consumption. Higher supermarket density within 3 km radius of
residence, however, was associated with increased vegetable consumption of
the full sample of women (Thornton et al.
2010a). In New Zealand, research by Pearce et al (Pearce et al. 2008;Pearce et al. 2009) found no
association between supermarket access and fruit and vegetable consumption.
However, this study did show that residents with the worst access to fast
food outlets were up to 17% more likely to consume the
recommended intake of vegetables and those with the best access to
convenience stores were up to 25% less likely to.

Europe
Across Europe, a total of nine articles written in English were
identified: eight from the UK (5 in England and three in Scotland), and one
from Ireland. This literature revealed many inconsistencies with several
studies reporting inconsistent findings. In the UK, Burgoine et al (Burgoine, Alvanides, &amp; Lake
2011) showed no association between fruit and vegetable consumption
and density of supermarkets or convenience stores. They also found an
unexpected association between elevated vegetable consumption and higher
density of food service outlets. These outlets included restaurants as well
as take-away outlets and the authors postulate that residents may not always
be making unhealthy choices if they are eating-out within their
neighbourhood. Two natural experiments exploring the effects of opening a
new supermarket have been conducted in the UK. In northern England,
consumers who switched supermarkets or lived within 500 meters of the new
store had increased fruit and vegetable consumption after the new
supermarket had opened (Wrigley et al.
2003). In Glasgow, however, no positive effect on the fruit and
vegetable intake of neighbourhood residents was identified even though 30%
of the sample reported switching to the new supermarket (Cummins et al. 2005a). The single
non-UK study revealed a weak effect for supermarket access on dietary
quality in the republic of Ireland: each additional supermarket within a two
kilometre radius from home was associated with a 2.5% increase in diet score
which represented a healthier dietary pattern (Layte, Harrington, Sexton, Perry, Cullinan, &amp; Lyons
2011). The findings from studies in Europe demonstrate
inconsistencies in the relationships between the community nutrition
environment and diet and the effect sizes observed have been relatively
small. However, the body of literature is limited, particularly outside the
UK, and there is a need to improve methodological techniques to enhance the
quality of this body of evidence (Caspi,
Sorensen, Subramanian, &amp; Kawachi 2012b;Charreire, Casey, Salze, Simon, Chaix, Banos,
Badariotti, Weber, &amp; Oppert 2010).

Consumer nutrition environment and dietary quality
A total of 20 studies used in-store audit tools to measure consumer
nutrition environment exposures and dietary outcomes in adults aged 18-60 years.
These studies tested whether (a) better availability, variety and quality of
healthy foods is associated with healthier dietary intakes and/or (b) lower
costs of healthy food and higher costs of less healthy food are associated with
healthier dietary outcomes.

Different in-store audit tools were used across most studies and few
studies reported the psychometric properties of reliability. Ten assessed
product availability, six of which identified at least one positive association
with diet. The eight studies that assessed price found either null associations
or unexpected associations where better dietary patterns were associated with
higher prices. The two longitudinal studies (Duffey, Gordon-Larsen, Shikany, Guilkey, Jacobs, Jr., &amp; Popkin
2010;Gordon-Larsen, Guilkey, &amp;
Popkin 2011), however, showed that price increases on less healthy
foods were associated with lower energy or fast food intake. Few studies
measured the variety or quality of products (n=4) and results were mixed.

Summaries of the findings from the 20 original research papers
investigating a relationship between consumer nutrition environment exposures
and diet are presented in Table 2. Almost
a quarter (24%) of findings regarding the availability of healthy products
revealed that better availability was associated to better dietary outcomes.
Findings for price investigations showed that while a fifth of studies showed
that lower prices of healthy and less healthy products increased consumption of
these foods, almost half of the findings regarding price showed that higher
prices of healthy foods were associated with better dietary outcomes. Few
studies (n=5) investigated the effect of produce variety or quality on dietary
outcomes and the evidence is currently equivocal.

The United States
A total of 16 studies from the United States have investigated links
between factors within food stores and dietary outcomes. This region has the
largest body of research on this topic and provides moderate evidence to
support the hypothesis that the consumer nutrition environment influences
diet. Of the ten studies investigating the relationship between product
availability and dietary outcomes, six showed at least one significant
association in the expected direction, healthy food availability and
healthier dietary intakes. One study found that, after adjusting for
individual characteristics, lower availability of healthy foods in
residential neighbourhood was associated with higher scores on the poorer
dietary pattern but not the better dietary pattern (Franco et al. 2009). Four studies using the NEMS-S
market basket tool showed mixed results: lower availability of healthier
foods was associated with poorer quality of diet patterns (Franco, Diez-Roux, Nettleton, Lazo, Brancati,
Caballero, Glass, &amp; Moore 2009) and better availability of
healthier foods was associated with higher odds of eating at least one serve
of vegetables a day (Gustafson, Lewis,
Perkins, Wilson, Buckner, &amp; Vail 2013b), but associations
between higher dietary quality and lower availability of healthier foods
have also been found (Casagrande, Franco,
Gittelsohn, Zonderman, Evans, Fanelli, &amp; Gary-Webb
2011).

Five of the nine studies investigating the effect of price on
dietary outcomes found at least one significant association in the expected
direction, higher prices and lower intake of less healthy items or lower
prices and increased intakes of healthy items. A longitudinal price study
showed a strong relationship between weekly fast food consumption and prices
of soda and weaker associations for take-away burger prices (Gordon-Larsen, Guilkey, &amp; Popkin
2011). This relationship was differentiated by ethnicity and
income. The strongest association, in black males, showed a 20% increase in
the price of soda was associated with a 0.25 reduction in number of days
eating fast food per week. Two recent cross-sectional studies using
published price data revealed negative associations between total diet cost
and dietary quality such that better quality diets were more costly (Rehm, Monsivais, &amp; Drewnowski
2011) and diet cost mediated the relationship between
socioeconomic position and diet quality (Monsivais, Aggarwal, &amp; Drewnowski 2012).

Other developed nations
Four studies have investigated product availability or price and
diet outside of the US: two from the UK and one each from Canada and
Australia. This small body of literature revealed inconsistent findings that
can largely be considered inconclusive.

Discussion
This review has summarised the evidence for neighbourhood disparities in
community and consumer nutrition environments from ten previous review articles, and
also assessed the evidence for the effect of community and consumer nutrition
environments on dietary intake. There is evidence that disadvantaged neighbourhoods
in the US have poorer access to healthy foods than more affluent areas. Globally
there is also a trend for greater access to less healthy foods in neighbourhoods of
higher deprivation. More than a quarter of density investigations and a fifth of
proximity investigations provide evidence for an association between increased
access to stores selling healthy foods and better dietary outcomes. There is some
evidence for neighbourhood disparities in the availability of healthier foods but
the evidence on price is less robust. A quarter of the food availability
investigations showed that greater availability of healthy foods was related to
better dietary outcomes however, half of the price investigations revealed that
higher prices for healthy products related to better dietary outcomes. The
literature for other consumer nutrition environment factors such as variety,
quality, placement and promotions is limited.

Community nutrition environment
There is consensus across review articles of evidence in the community
nutrition environment literature for area-based inequalities in healthy food
access in the US: residents of low income and ethnic minority neighbourhoods in
the US have disproportionately poorer access to healthy food than residents of
more affluent neighbourhoods. The evidence for differences in access to healthy
food is equivocal for Australia, Canada and the UK. However, there is compelling
international evidence for inequalities in access to less healthy foods:
neighbourhoods with higher levels of deprivation and ethnic populations have
greater access to fast food outlets than more affluent, predominantly white
neighbourhoods. This evidence confirms that, particularly in the US, there is
variation in terms of neighbourhood factors that influence diet and health. The
stronger evidence from the US may be in-part due to the higher levels of urban
residential segregation in the US than in other developed countries. Globally,
low income areas offer low rent, low competition and cheap labour opportunities,
however black areas in the US are also stigmatised and seen as undesirable to
many retailers including supermarket chains (Kwate 2008). In these circumstances, policy makers may be reliant on
retailers willing to trade in these communities such as fast food chains, to
create jobs and employment opportunities for local residents.

Fraser et al (Fraser, Edwards, Cade,
&amp; Clarke 2010) have suggested that the disparities identified
above are an illustration of the ‘deprivation amplification’
effect. Deprivation amplification describes how individual or household
deprivation, for example low income or educational attainment, is amplified by
area level deprivation and the conditions within deprived neighbourhoods such as
the increased availability of less healthy foods or decreased availability of
affordable healthy food (Macintyre et al.
1993). However, as has been suggested in the literature (Macintyre 2007) and confirmed by the
evidence in our review, it may not always be true that poorer neighbourhoods
provide a less healthful environment for residents. Two recent intervention
studies, focused on mobile food stores, aimed to improve access to fruit and
vegetables in low income communities. The interventions, which involved a mobile
food store in the UK and farmers market in the US, found that self-reported
intakes of fruit and vegetables had increased over the time period of the
interventions (Evans et al. 2012;Jennings et al. 2012). Neither of these
studies, however, used a control group or indicated adjustment for individual or
societal factors that may have also influenced dietary intake. Other initiatives
such as public-private partnerships to introduce supermarkets to underserved
areas, improved transportation in low income neighbourhoods or restrictions and
incentives for food retailers such as zoning regulations or tax rebates have
been proposed as strategies to enable a more equitable distribution of food
sources (Hilmers, Hilmers, &amp; Dave
2012).

Consumer nutrition environment
There have been fewer studies of the consumer nutrition environment than
the community nutrition environment and the findings of these studies are mixed.
There is some evidence in the US for poorer availability of healthy products in
low income and ethnic neighbourhoods than more affluent neighbourhoods. The
evidence from other developed countries is weaker and less consistent. The
evidence for neighbourhood disparities in price is varied across all countries
with findings showing both cheaper and dearer prices in disadvantaged
neighbourhoods. While few studies have assessed neighbourhood differences in
quality of food, the evidence consistently showed poorer quality produce in more
deprived than more affluent neighbourhoods. Moving to consider how consumer
nutrition environment factors relate to diet, the literature shows evidence for
associations between price and availability and dietary intake in the US. The
literature and evidence from other developed countries is limited and weaker.
Changes in the price of less healthy foods, particularly sweet carbonated
drinks, have shown that as price increased intake of these foods decreased. This
relationship was differentiated by ethnicity and income with the strongest
associations observed in blacks and low-income earners. Local availability of
healthy foods was also shown to relate to poorer dietary patterns but not better
dietary patterns. This finding suggests that individuals with poorer diets may
be disproportionately affected by their neighbourhood food environment than
individuals with better quality diets. This disparity may result from being less
likely to have access to a private car to travel to other shopping opportunities
or more likely to keep daily activities to a more localised space (Coveney et
al. 2009).

Limitations of the food environment literature
Methodological limitations of the neighbourhood food environment
literature have been repeatedly cited in review articles (Beaulac, Kristjansson, &amp; Cummins 2009;Black &amp; Macinko 2008;Fleischhacker, Evenson, Rodriguez, &amp;
Ammerman 2011;Ford &amp;
Dzewaltowski 2008;Fraser, Edwards,
Cade, &amp; Clarke 2010;Larson,
Story, &amp; Nelson 2009;Walker,
Keane, &amp; Burke 2010). Heterogeneity in the categorisation of
outlets, definition of neighbourhood and measurement of exposure variables, as
well as the ecological study design of many studies have been reported as
potential contributors to the inconsistent findings observed in review papers. A
great assortment of neighbourhood boundaries have been applied including various
predefined boundaries from census blocks to county boundaries and wide range of
buffer zone radii measured by road network or Euclidean distance. A variety of
food outlet categorisation systems have been applied across studies and the
majority of studies have focused on one or two outlet types with very few
assessing the neighbourhood differences or dietary affects of a full range of
food retailers.

Much of the research to date is ecological in design, comparing
neighbourhood or dietary data from national or cohort surveys with secondary
food outlet information and may not accurately represent true associations. Few
studies ground-truthed their food outlet data and may misrepresent food outlet
access by including outlets that have ceased to trade and miss those which have
recently opened. Field validation studies of secondary data have shown only fair
to moderate agreement between observation and existence of food outlets from
commercial and government lists or remote sensing technology such as Google
street view (Lake et al. 2010;Powell et al. 2011). Levels of agreement,
however, were poorer when categorisation of outlets was included in the
comparison (Clarke et al. 2010;Rossen et al. 2012). The findings from
secondary data may therefore need to be viewed with caution and more
longitudinal studies are needed, particularly using individualised data.

Another methodological limitation of this body of literature is the
premise that people shop and are primarily influenced by food outlets
geographically proximate to their homes (Zenk
et al. 2011). The assessment of individualised living spaces for
community nutrition environment research has been piloted in two studies: one
used seven day global positioning system tracking data to create a total
individualised area by buffering all locations visited by 0.5 mile radius (Zenk, Schulz, Matthews, Odoms-Young, Wilbur,
Wegrzyn, Gibbs, Braunschweig, &amp; Stokes 2011) and the other
used one day travel surveys and locations visited as anchor points to calculate
an individualised area (Kestens et al.
2010). Time-geographic accessibility measures may also provide
opportunities for more complete and realistic representations of the food
environment by considering exposures along routes people regularly travel in
conjunction with practical time restrictions on food shopping (Widener et al. 2013). Applying these
individualised food environment exposure measures to individualised dietary
measures will help eliminate the ambiguity found in the current evidence.

There is also a need for consumer nutrition environment studies to link
dietary data to the in-store environment of where people shop to overcome
previous methodological assumptions (Caspi,
Sorensen, Subramanian, &amp; Kawachi 2012b). Thus, consumer
nutrition environment studies could be further enhanced by the use of reliable
tools that assess the range of environmental stimuli consumers face when
shopping in additional to product availability and price, including product
placement, prominence, promotion and labelling (Kelly et al. 2011). These tools may also be useful for assessing
organisational nutrition environments such as workplace canteens (Kelly, Flood, &amp; Yeatman 2011).

It has been suggested that the single most important strategy for future
food environment research is combining multiple environment assessment
techniques. An intelligent mix of in-store audit measures and GIS based methods
would provide a more accurate characterisation of the neighbourhood food
environment (Rose et al. 2010). A good
example of such multi-dimensional assessment is work by Hermstad et al (Hermstad, Swan, Kegler, Barnette, &amp; Glanz
2010) which used structural equation modelling to investigate the
relative influence of environmental, social and individual level factors on
dietary fat intake. The reliable in-store audit tool NEMS-S was used to assess
the availability, cost and quality of lower fat items and scores were summed for
all grocery and convenience stores within a five mile radius of participants
home. Proximity measures of fast food outlets were also calculated. Modelling
calculations measured the combined effect of these exposures as well as the home
nutrition environment, perceived nutrition environment and psychosocial factors.
Further research applying a multi-dimensional approach to investigating the
neighbourhood food environment and incorporating potential mediating factors
such as transport method and psychosocial factors is needed. Recent qualitative
research has also shown that residents of deprived neighbourhoods do not respond
in a uniform manner to similar in-store supermarket environments suggesting a
mediating role for psychosocial factors (Thompson et al. 2013). Therefore, socio-ecological conceptual
approaches and sophisticated modelling techniques are required alongside
qualitative research to enhance the current state of the evidence and identify
the relative influence of multiple dimensions of the neighbourhood food
environment and psychosocial factors on dietary inequalities. Findings of such
research are likely to help inform the allocation of resources and development
of complex interventions to improve disparities in dietary intake.

Conclusion
This review summarised the evidence for neighbourhood disparities in
community and consumer nutrition environments from 10 previous review articles, and
also assessed the evidence for an effect of the community and consumer nutrition
environments on dietary intake. There is evidence for inequalities in food access in
the US; trends are less evident in other developed countries. The evidence also
shows a trend for greater access and availability, to either healthy or less healthy
foods, relating to diet as expected. However unexpectedly, the evidence for price
shows a trend for higher prices of healthy foods being associated with better
dietary outcomes. The neighbourhood food environment literature suffers from
considerable heterogeneity in methodology and generalised environmental exposures.
These methodological limitations hinder the development of clear policy
recommendations and interventions to improve nutrition environments. Further
research applying a multi-dimensional approach and individualised environmental
exposures is needed to enhance the current state of the evidence and help inform
future interventions.

Acknowledgments
This review is independent research arising from a Doctoral Research Fellowship
supported by the National Institute for Health Research. The views expressed in this
publication are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the
National Institute for Health Research or the Department of Health.

Figure 1 Model of nutrition environments (Glanz et al.
2005)

Figure 2 Summary of findings relating density of healthier food stores to better dietary
quality or higher fruit and vegetable intake.

* Across 42 different exposure measures, 17 studies and 21 papers.

Figure 3 Summary of findings relating proximity of healthier food stores to better dietary
quality/fruit and vegetable intake.

* Across 11 different exposure measures, 16 studies and 18 papers.

Figure 4 Summary of findings relating density of less healthy food stores to poorer
dietary outcome.

* Across 10 different exposure measures for convenience stores, 7 studies and 7
papers.

* Across 12 different exposure measures for fast food outlets, 8 studies and 9
papers.

* 2 studies were not included in the convenience store calculation because
different outcome measures were used.

* 5 studies were not included in the fast food outlet calculation because
different outcome measures were used.

Figure 5 Summary of findings relating density of less healthy stores to poorer dietary
outcomes.

* Across 5 different exposure measures for convenience stores, 7 studies and 7
papers.

* Across 1 different exposure measures for fast food outlets, 4 studies and 5
papers.

* 1 study was not included in the convenience store calculation because different
outcome measures were used.

* 1 study was not included in the fast food outlet calculation because different
outcome measures were used.

Table 1 Summary of review articles and key findings relevant to neighbourhood
inequalities in the community nutrition environment and consumer nutrition
environment.

Author, year	Review aim and methods	Number of papers reviewed	Geographical coverage	Key findings - Community nutrition
environment	Key findings - Consumer nutrition
environment	
Hilmers,
2012
Am J Public Health	Examine socio-economic/ ethnic disparities in
neighbourhood access to fast food outlets and convenience
stores.

Reviewed literature from 2000 to 2011.	24 in total, all relevant to this
review.

14 ecological design.	Australia
Canada
New
Zealand
UK
US	14 of 18 studies identified fast food access
favoured more deprived areas.

5 of 9 studies found fast
food access was greater in predominantly ethnic
areas.

All 8 studies found higher density of convenience
stores in areas of higher deprivation/ ethnicity.		
Gustafson,
2012
J Community Health	Review literature on food availability in
stores and neighbourhood characteristics, diet, weight and food
prices.

Reviewed literature between 2000 and
2011.

Described as systematic review.	56 in total.

30 relevant to
this review, all cross-sectional design.	Australia
UK
US		Inconsistent evidence for less availability of
healthy food (6 of 10) and F&amp;V (7 of 11) in poorer/ ethnic
areas.

Prices of healthy foods (2 of 8) rarely differed
by area deprivation.

All 8 studies showed quality of
healthy foods was poorer in more deprived areas.	
Fleischhacker, 2010
Obesity
Reviews	Systematic review to examine the evidence on
fast food access and its associations with socioeconomic status,
ethnicity, obesity, other health
behaviours/outcomes.

Reviewed literature between 1998 and
2008.
Described as systematic review.	40 in total.

17 relevant to
this review.

3 cross-sectional design and 14 ecological
design.	Australia
Canada
New
Zealand
UK
US	Only 3 of 15 studies did not find fast food
outlets were more prevalent in low income areas (all
non-US).

7 of 9 studies found fast food outlets were more
prevalent in high ethnic minority areas.		
Fraser,
2010
Int J Environ Research Public Health	Summarise the literature regarding fast food
outlet location by area deprivation, dietary intake and
weight.

Reviewed literature between 1990 and 2009.	33 in total.
12 relevant to this
review, all ecological design.	Australia
Canada
New
Zealand
UK
US	10 out of 11 studies showed associations
between increasing area deprivation and access to fast food
outlets.

The 2 studies identified showed a positive
association between area ethnicity and access to fast food outlets.		
Walker,
2010
Health &amp; Place	To review the literature on healthy food
access in the US.

Reviewed literature up to January
2010.	31 in total.

20 relevant to
this review.

8 cross-sectional design and 12 ecological
design.	US	Evidence to suggest that disparities in
supermarket access exist with ethnic minority and low-income
neighbourhoods being disproportionately
affected.

Non-chain smaller grocery stores are more
likely to be located in poor areas. Supermarkets are more prevalent in
more affluent areas.	Chain supermarkets have lower prices and
better availability and quality of healthy food than smaller non-chain
stores.

Residents of neighbourhoods with no supermarket
pay more for food and have poorer quality food.	
Beaulac,
2009
Preventing Chronic Disease	To determine whether access to healthy,
affordable food in retails stores varies by area, specifically
disadvantaged areas.

Reviewed literature up to
2007.

Systematic review - two independent authors
reviewed the search results.	52 in total, all relevant to this
review.

32 cross-sectional design and 20 ecological
design.	Australia
Canada
New
Zealand
UK
US	18 out of 19 US studies showed low-income/
black American areas were underserved by grocery stores compared with
more advantaged areas.

In other developed countries, 1
out of 6 studies found that low-income areas had poorer access to
grocery stores while 2 studies showed low income areas had better
access.	5 of 9 US studies found poorer availability
and quality of foods in disadvantaged areas.

6 of 9 nine
studies in other developed countries found no difference in
availability, variety or quality of healthy foods by area
deprivation.

In all countries findings for price were
mixed and complex. From a total of 23 studies, 3 found higher prices in
poorer areas, 4 found lower prices in poorer areas and 16 found mixed or
no association.	
Larson,
2009
Am J Prev Medicine	To comprehensively review disparities across
the US according to neighbourhood access to more and less healthy foods
and obesity and dietary outcomes.
Reviewed literature between
1985 and 2008.	54 in total.

26 relevant to
this review.

14 cross-sectional design and12 ecological
design.	US	14 of 17 studies showed low income and ethnic
neighbourhoods were more often affected by poor access to supermarkets
than more affluent areas.

4 of 6 studies showed access to
fast food outlets was greater in low income and minority areas.	8 of 10 studies showed the availability of
healthy food was poorer in more disadvantaged areas.

2 of
2 studies showed restaurants in more affluent areas off more health menu
options than low income areas.	
Lovasi,
2009
Epidemiologic Reviews	To evaluate whether built environments might
explain ethnic and socioeconomic disparities in
obesity.

Reviewed literature between 1995 and 2009.	45 in total.

15 relevant to
this review.

8 cross-sectional design and 7 ecological
design.	US	10 of 15 studies found disadvantaged areas had
fewer supermarkets than more affluent areas.

5 of 8
studies found higher proportions of fast food outlets in more
disadvantaged areas.		
Ford,
2008
Nutrition Reviews	To provide preliminary evidence to assess: (a)
geographical disparities in the retail food environment, (b)
disadvantaged areas have poor-quality retail food environment (c)
individuals exposed to poor-quality retail food environments have poorer
quality diets and higher obesity rates.

Reviewed
literature from 1992 to 2007.	13 in total, all relevant to this
review.

7 cross-sectional design and 6 ecological
design.	US	8 of 9 studies found lower access to
supermarkets in more deprived and ethnic areas compared to more affluent
and white neighbourhoods.	5 of 5 studies found poorer availability or
quality of healthy foods is more disadvantaged areas.

2
of 2 studies found no difference in price of products by area
deprivation or ethnicity.	
Black, 2007
Nutrition Reviews	Comprehensively assess the neighbourhood
determinants of obesity in high-income
countries.

Reviewed literature from 2005 to 2007.	90 in total.

18 relevant to
this review.

5 cross-sectional and 13 ecological.	Australia
Canada
UK
US	9 US studies showed access to stores selling
healthy food is worse for low income neighbourhoods.

3
studies from Canada, Australia and UK did not identify differences in
grocery store access by area deprivation. 2 studies found more food
retailers in low income areas.

4 studies from the US, UK
and Australia showed low income and ethnic neighbourhoods had greater
exposure to fast food outlets.	2 studies showed low income and ethnic areas
had fewer healthy choices in local restaurants.	
Table 2 Summary of findings relating consumer nutrition environment exposures to better
dietary quality/higher fruit and vegetable intake.


Direction of relationship
	
Number of findings
	
Availability	Price	Variety	Quality	
Inverse (unexpected)	2	11	0	0	

None
	27	12	3	4	

Positive
	9	5	1	1	
	
Number of exposure measures	20	13	3	4	
Number of papers	11	10	3	4	
Number of studies	11	10	3	4	

   
            Apparicio P  
            Cloutier MS  
            Shearmur R  
           The case of Montreal’s missing food deserts: Evaluation of
accessibility to food supermarkets International Journal of Health Geographics 2007 6 available from: ISI:000258119300001 

            Ball K  
            Crawford D  
            Mishra G  
           Socio-economic inequalities in women’s fruit and vegetable
intakes: a multilevel study of individual, social and environmental
mediators Public Health Nutr 2006 9 5 623 630 available from: PM:16923294 16923294 

            Ball K  
            Mishra GD  
            Thane CW  
            Hodge A  
           How well do Australian women comply with dietary
guidelines? Public Health Nutrition 2004 7 3 443 452 available from: ISI:000222034100010 15153275 

            Ball K  
            Timperio A  
            Crawford D  
           Neighbourhood socioeconomic inequalities in food access and
affordability Health &amp; Place 2009 15 2 578 585 available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6VH5-4TPX0RS-3/2/f4efd8917531052792761df20ca1a32d  19046654 

            Beaulac J  
            Kristjansson E  
            Cummins S  
           A systematic review of food deserts, 1966-2007 Prev Chronic Dis 2009 6 3 A105 available from: PM:19527577 19527577 

            Black C  
            Ntani G  
            Kenny R  
            Tinati T  
            Jarman M  
            Lawrence W  
            Barker M  
            Inskip H  
            Cooper C  
            Moon G  
            Baird J  
           Variety and quality of healthy foods differ according to
neighbourhood deprivation Health Place 2012 18 6 1292 1299 available from: PM:23085202 23085202 

            Black JL  
            Carpiano RM  
            Fleming S  
            Lauster N  
           Exploring the distribution of food stores in British Columbia:
associations with neighbourhood socio-demographic factors and urban
form Health Place 2011 17 4 961 970 available from: PM:21565544 21565544 

            Black JL  
            Macinko J  
           Neighborhoods and obesity Nutrition Reviews 2008 66 1 2 20 available from: PM:18254880 18254880 

            Block D  
            Kouba J  
           A comparison of the availability and affordability of a market
basket in two communities in the Chicago area Public Health Nutrition 2006 9 7 837 845 available from: ISI:000240867400006 17010248 

            Boone-Heinonen J  
            Gordon-Larsen P  
            Kiefe CI  
            Shikany JM  
            Lewis CE  
            Popkin BM  
           Fast food restaurants and food stores: longitudinal associations
with diet in young to middle-aged adults: the CARDIA study Archives of Internal Medicine 2011 171 13 1162 1170 available from: PM:21747011 21747011 

            Bovell-Benjamin AC  
            Hathorn CS  
            Ibrahim S  
            Gichuhi PN  
            Bromfield EM  
           Healthy food choices and physical activity opportunities in two
contrasting Alabama cities Health Place 2009 15 2 429 438 available from: PM:18845469 18845469 

            Burgoine T  
            Alvanides S  
            Lake AA  
           Assessing the obesogenic environment of North East
England Health Place 2011 17 3 738 747 available from: PM:21450512 21450512 

            Burgoine T  
            Lake AA  
            Stamp E  
            Alvanides S  
            Mathers JC  
            Adamson AJ  
           Changing foodscapes 1980-2000, using the ASH30
Study Appetite 2009 53 2 157 165 available from: PM:19467279 19467279 

            Burns CM  
            Inglis AD  
           Measuring food access in Melbourne: Access to healthy and fast
foods by car, bus and foot in an urban municipality in
Melbourne Health &amp; Place 2007 13 4 877 885 available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6VH5-4NM5Y00-1/2/332fffdc2f31fc576b1b5eca928cfb9b  17470408 

            Casagrande SS  
            Franco M  
            Gittelsohn J  
            Zonderman AB  
            Evans MK  
            Fanelli KM  
            Gary-Webb TL  
           Healthy food availability and the association with BMI in
Baltimore, Maryland Public Health Nutr 2011 14 6 1001 1007 available from: PM:21272422 21272422 

            Caspi CE  
            Kawachi I  
            Subramanian SV  
            Adamkiewicz G  
            Sorensen G  
           The relationship between diet and perceived and objective access
to supermarkets among low-income housing residents Social Science and Medicine 2012a 75 7 1254 1262 available from: PM:22727742 22727742 

            Caspi CE  
            Sorensen G  
            Subramanian SV  
            Kawachi I  
           The local food environment and diet: A systematic
review Health Place 2012b 18 5 1172 1187 available from: PM:22717379 22717379 

            Charreire H  
            Casey R  
            Salze P  
            Simon C  
            Chaix B  
            Banos A  
            Badariotti D  
            Weber C  
            Oppert JM  
           Measuring the food environment using geographical information
systems: a methodological review Public Health Nutr 2010 13 11 1773 1785 available from: PM:20409354 20409354 

            Clarke G  
            Eyre H  
            Guy C  
           Deriving indicators of access to food retail provision in British
cities: Studies of Cardiff, Leeds and Bradford Urban Studies 2002 39 11 2041 2060 available from: ISI:000178382600005 

            Clarke P  
            Ailshire J  
            Melendez R  
            Bader M  
            Morenoff J  
           Using Google Earth to conduct a neighborhood audit: Reliability
of a virtual audit instrument Health &amp; Place 2010 16 6 1224 1229 available from: ISI:000284135900019 20797897 

            Coveney J  
            O’Dwyer LA  
           Effects of mobility and location on food access Health &amp; Place 2009 15 1 45 55 available from: ISI:000261636300006 18396090 

            Cummins S  
            Macintyre S  
           A systematic study of an urban foodscape: The price and
availability of food in Greater Glasgow Urban Studies 2002 39 11 2115 2130 available from: ISI:000178382600009 

            Cummins S  
            Petticrew M  
            Higgins C  
            Findlay A  
            Sparks L  
           Large scale food retailing as an intervention for diet and
health: quasi-experimental evaluation of a natural
experiment Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 2005a 59 12 1035 1040 available from: ISI:000233271200008 16286490 

            Cummins S  
            Smith DM  
            Aitken Z  
            Dawson J  
            Marshall D  
            Sparks L  
            Anderson AS  
           Neighbourhood deprivation and the price and availability of fruit
and vegetables in Scotland J Hum Nutr Diet 2010 23 5 494 501 available from: PM:20831708 20831708 

            Cummins SC  
            McKay L  
            Macintyre S  
           McDonald’s restaurants and neighborhood deprivation in
Scotland and England Am J Prev Med 2005b 29 4 308 310 available from: PM:16242594 16242594 

            Cummins S  
           Neighbourhood food environment and diet--Time for improved
conceptual models? Preventive Medicine 2007 44 3 196 197 available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6WPG-4MT551Y-1/2/4801a83220992bd21680f80d7312e128  17222896 
Department of Health UK Healthy Lives, Healthy People: Our strategy for public health in
England 2010 Her Majesty’s Stationery Office London 

            Duffey KJ  
            Gordon-Larsen P  
            Shikany JM  
            Guilkey D  
            Jacobs DR Jr  
            Popkin BM  
           Food price and diet and health outcomes: 20 years of the CARDIA
Study Archives of Internal Medicine 2010 170 5 420 426 available from: PM:20212177 20212177 

            Dunn RA  
            Sharkey JR  
            Horel S  
           The effect of fast-food availability on fast-food consumption and
obesity among rural residents: an analysis by race/ethnicity Econ Hum Biol 2012 10 1 1 13 available from: PM:22094047 22094047 

            Ecob R  
            Macintyre S  
           Small area variations in health related behaviours; do these
depend on the behaviour itself, its measurement, or on personal
characteristics? Health Place 2000 6 4 261 274 available from: PM:11027952 11027952 

            Evans AE  
            Jennings R  
            Smiley AW  
            Medina JL  
            Sharma SV  
            Rutledge R  
            Stigler MH  
            Hoelscher DM  
           Introduction of farm stands in low-income communities increases
fruit and vegetable among community residents Health Place 2012 18 5 1137 1143 available from: PM:22608130 22608130 

            Fleischhacker SE  
            Evenson KR  
            Rodriguez DA  
            Ammerman AS  
           A systematic review of fast food access studies Obesity Reviews 2011 12 501 e460 e471 available from: ISI:000289687500044 20149118 

            Ford PB  
            Dzewaltowski DA  
           Disparities in obesity prevalence due to variation in the retail
food environment: three testable hypotheses Nutrition Reviews 2008 66 4 216 228 available from: ISI:000254385200005 18366535 
Foresight Tackling Obesities: Future Choices - Project Report 2007 Government Office for Science 

            Fox R  
            Smith G  
           Sinner Ladies and the gospel of good taste: geographies of food,
class and care Health Place 2011 17 2 403 412 available from: PM:20801073 20801073 

            Franco M  
            Diez-Roux AV  
            Nettleton JA  
            Lazo M  
            Brancati F  
            Caballero B  
            Glass T  
            Moore LV  
           Availability of healthy foods and dietary patterns: the
Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2009 89 3 897 904 available from: PM:19144728 19144728 

            Fraser LK  
            Edwards KL  
            Cade J  
            Clarke GP  
           The geography of Fast Food outlets: a review Int J Environ Res Public Health 2010 7 5 2290 2308 available from: PM:20623025 20623025 

            Fuller D  
            Cummins S  
            Matthews SA  
           Does transportation mode modify associations between distance to
food store, fruit and vegetable consumption, and BMI in low-income
neighborhoods? American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2013 97 1 167 172 available from: ISI:000313135600022 23193006 

            Giskes K  
            van Lenthe F  
            Avendano-Pabon M  
            Brug J  
           A systematic review of environmental factors and obesogenic
dietary intakes among adults: are we getting closer to understanding
obesogenic environments? Obesity Reviews 2011 12 501 e95 e106 available from: ISI:000289687500012 20604870 

            Glanz K  
            Sallis JF  
            Saelens BE  
            Frank LD  
           Healthy Nutrition Environments: Concepts and
Measures American Journal of Health Promotion 2005 19 5 330 333 available from: http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&amp;db=s3h&amp;AN=17004178&amp;site=ehost-live  15895534 

            Gordon C  
            Purciel-Hill M  
            Ghai NR  
            Kaufman L  
            Graham R  
            Van WG  
           Measuring food deserts in New York City’s low-income
neighborhoods Health Place 2011 17 2 696 700 available from: PM:21256070 21256070 

            Gordon-Larsen P  
            Guilkey DK  
            Popkin BM  
           An economic analysis of community-level fast food prices and
individual-level fast food intake: A longitudinal study Health &amp; Place 2011 17 6 1235 1241 available from: ISI:000296671500007 21852178 

            Gustafson A  
            Christian JW  
            Lewis S  
            Moore K  
            Jilcott S  
           Food venue choice, consumer food environment, but not food venue
availability within daily travel patterns are associated with dietary intake
among adults, Lexington Kentucky 2011 Nutrition Journal 2013a 12 available from: ISI:000315384000001 

            Gustafson A  
            Hankins S  
            Jilcott S  
           Measures of the consumer food store environment: a systematic
review of the evidence 2000-2011 Journal of Community Health 2012 37 4 897 911 available from: PM:22160660 22160660 

            Gustafson A  
            Lewis S  
            Perkins S  
            Wilson C  
            Buckner E  
            Vail A  
           Neighbourhood and consumer food environment is associated with
dietary intake among Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)
participants in Fayette County, Kentucky Public Health Nutrition 2013b 16 7 1229 1237 available from: ISI:000319614800010 23462377 

            Gustafson AA  
            Sharkey J  
            Samuel-Hodge CD  
            Jones-Smith J  
            Folds MC  
            Cai J  
            Ammerman AS  
           Perceived and objective measures of the food store environment
and the association with weight and diet among low-income women in North
Carolina Public Health Nutr 2011 14 6 1032 1038 available from: PM:21324229 21324229 

            Hermstad AK  
            Swan DW  
            Kegler MC  
            Barnette JK  
            Glanz K  
           Individual and environmental correlates of dietary fat intake in
rural communities: a structural equation model analysis Social Science and Medicine 2010 71 1 93 101 available from: PM:20462682 20462682 

            Hickson DA  
            Diez Roux AV  
            Smith AE  
            Tucker KL  
            Gore LD  
            Zhang L  
            Wyatt SB  
           Associations of fast food restaurant availability with dietary
intake and weight among African Americans in the Jackson Heart Study,
2000-2004 Am J Public Health 2011 101 Suppl 1 S301 S309 available from: PM:21551382 21551382 

            Hilmers A  
            Hilmers DC  
            Dave J  
           Neighborhood disparities in access to healthy foods and their
effects on environmental justice Am J Public Health 2012 102 9 1644 1654 available from: PM:22813465 22813465 

            Holsten JE  
           Obesity and the community food environment: a systematic
review Public Health Nutr 2009 12 3 397 405 available from: PM:18477414 18477414 

            Jack D  
            Neckerman K  
            Schwartz-Soicher O  
            Lovasi GS  
            Quinn J  
            Richards C  
            Bader M  
            Weiss C  
            Konty K  
            Arno P  
            Viola D  
             
           Socio-economic status, neighbourhood food environments and
consumption of fruits and vegetables in New York City Public Health Nutrition 2013 16 7 1197 1205 available from: ISI:000319614800007 23388104 

            Jennings A  
            Cassidy A  
            Winters T  
            Barnes S  
            Lipp A  
            Holland R  
            Welch A  
           Positive effect of a targeted intervention to improve access and
availability of fruit and vegetables in an area of
deprivation Health Place 2012 18 5 1074 1078 available from: PM:22705164 22705164 

            Kawakami N  
            Winkleby M  
            Skog L  
            Szulkin R  
            Sundquist K  
           Differences in neighborhood accessibility to health-related
resources: a nationwide comparison between deprived and affluent
neighborhoods in Sweden Health Place 2011 17 1 132 139 available from: PM:20961797 20961797 

            Kelly B  
            Flood VM  
            Yeatman H  
           Measuring local food environments: an overview of available
methods and measures Health Place 2011 17 6 1284 1293 available from: PM:21908229 21908229 

            Kestens Y  
            Lebel A  
            Daniel M  
            Theriault M  
            Pampalon R  
           Using experienced activity spaces to measure foodscape
exposure Health Place 2010 16 6 1094 1103 available from: PM:20667762 20667762 

            Kwate NO  
           Fried chicken and fresh apples: racial segregation as a
fundamental cause of fast food density in black
neighborhoods Health Place 2008 14 1 32 44 available from: PM:17576089 17576089 

            Kwate NO  
            Yau CY  
            Loh JM  
            Williams D  
           Inequality in obesigenic environments: fast food density in New
York City Health Place 2009 15 1 364 373 available from: PM:18722151 18722151 

            Lake AA  
            Burgoine T  
            Greenhalgh F  
            Stamp E  
            Tyrrell R  
           The foodscape: classification and field validation of secondary
data sources Health Place 2010 16 4 666 673 available from: PM:20207577 20207577 

            Larson NI  
            Story MT  
            Nelson MC  
           Neighborhood environments: disparities in access to healthy foods
in the U.S Am J Prev Med 2009 36 1 74 81 available from: PM:18977112 18977112 

            Latham J  
            Moffat T  
           Determinants of variation in food cost and availability in two
socioeconomically contrasting neighbourhoods of Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada Health Place 2007 13 1 273 287 available from: PM:16542866 16542866 

            Layte R  
            Harrington J  
            Sexton E  
            Perry IJ  
            Cullinan J  
            Lyons S  
           Irish exceptionalism? Local food environments and dietary
quality J Epidemiol Community Health 2011 65 10 881 888 available from: PM:21372065 21372065 

            Lisabeth LD  
            Sanchez BN  
            Escobar J  
            Hughes R  
            Meurer WJ  
            Zuniga B  
            Garcia N  
            Brown DL  
            Morgenstern LB  
           The food environment in an urban Mexican American
community Health Place 2010 16 3 598 605 available from: PM:20167528 20167528 

            Lovasi GS  
            Hutson MA  
            Guerra M  
            Neckerman KM  
           Built environments and obesity in disadvantaged
populations Epidemiologic Reviews 2009 31 7 20 available from: PM:19589839 19589839 

            Macdonald L  
            Cummins S  
            Macintyre S  
           Neighbourhood fast food environment and area
deprivation-substitution or concentration? Appetite 2007 49 1 251 254 available from: PM:17189662 17189662 

            Macdonald L  
            Ellaway A  
            Ball K  
            Macintyre S  
           Is proximity to a food retail store associated with diet and BMI
in Glasgow, Scotland? BMC Public Health 2011 11 464 available from: PM:21663674 21663674 

            Macdonald L  
            Ellaway A  
            Macintyre S  
           The food retail environment and area deprivation in Glasgow City,
UK International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical
Activity 2009 6 1 52 available from: http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/6/1/52  19660114 

            Macintyre S  
           Deprivation amplification revisited; or, is it always true that
poorer places have poorer access to resources for healthy diets and physical
activity? Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2007 4 32 available from: PM:17683624 17683624 

            Macintyre S  
            Maciver S  
            Sooman A  
           Area, Class and Health - Should We be Focusing on Places Or
People Journal of Social Policy 1993 22 213 234 available from: ISI:A1993LD08000004 

            Macintyre S  
            McKay L  
            Cummins S  
            Burns C  
           Out-of-home food outlets and area deprivation: case study in
Glasgow, UK Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2005 2 16 available from: PM:16248898 16248898 

            McKinnon RA  
            Reedy J  
            Handy SL  
            Rodgers AB  
           Measuring the food and physical activity environments: shaping
the research agenda Am J Prev Med 2009a 36 4 Suppl S81 S85 available from: PM:19285213 19285213 

            McKinnon RA  
            Reedy J  
            Morrissette MA  
            Lytle LA  
            Yaroch AL  
           Measures of the food environment: a compilation of the
literature, 1990-2007 Am J Prev Med 2009b 36 4 Suppl S124 S133 available from: PM:19285203 19285203 

            McLaren L  
           Socioeconomic status and obesity Epidemiologic Reviews 2007 29 29 48 available from: ISI:000248364800003 17478442 

            McLeroy KR  
            Bibeau D  
            Steckler A  
            Glanz K  
           An ecological perspective on health promotion
programs Health Education Quarterly 1988 15 4 351 377 available from: PM:3068205 3068205 

            Mente A  
            de KL  
            Shannon HS  
            Anand SS  
           A systematic review of the evidence supporting a causal link
between dietary factors and coronary heart disease Archives of Internal Medicine 2009 169 7 659 669 available from: PM:19364995 19364995 

            Minaker LM  
            Raine KD  
            Wild TC  
            Nykiforuk CIJ  
            Thompson ME  
            Frank LD  
           Objective Food Environments and Health Outcomes American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2013 45 3 289 296 available from: ISI:000323191900006 23953355 

            Monsivais P  
            Aggarwal A  
            Drewnowski A  
           Are socio-economic disparities in diet quality explained by diet
cost? J Epidemiol Community Health 2012 66 6 530 535 available from: PM:21148819 21148819 

            Murakami K  
            Sasaki S  
            Takahashi Y  
            Uenishi K  
           Neighbourhood food store availability in relation to 24 h urinary
sodium and potassium excretion in young Japanese women British Journal of Nutrition 2010 104 7 1043 1050 available from: PM:20420755 20420755 

            Oakes JM  
            Masse LC  
            Messer LC  
           Work group III: Methodologic issues in research on the food and
physical activity environments: addressing data complexity Am J Prev Med 2009 36 4 Suppl S177 S181 available from: PM:19285211 19285211 

            Ollberding NJ  
            Nigg CR  
            Geller KS  
            Horwath CC  
            Motl RW  
            Dishman RK  
           Food Outlet Accessibility and Fruit and Vegetable
Consumption American Journal of Health Promotion 2012 26 6 366 370 available from: ISI:000306157300008 22747319 

            Pearce J  
            Hiscock R  
            Blakely T  
            Witten K  
           The contextual effects of neighbourhood access to supermarkets
and convenience stores on individual fruit and vegetable
consumption Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 2008 62 3 198 201 available from: ISI:000253151400004 18272733 

            Pearce J  
            Hiscock R  
            Blakely T  
            Witten K  
           A national study of the association between neighbourhood access
to fast-food outlets and the diet and weight of local
residents Health Place 2009 15 1 193 197 available from: PM:18499502 18499502 

            Powell LM  
            Chaloupka FJ  
            Bao Y  
           The availability of fast-food and full-service restaurants in the
United States: associations with neighborhood
characteristics Am J Prev Med 2007a 33 4 Suppl S240 S245 available from: PM:17884571 17884571 

            Powell LM  
            Han E  
            Zenk SN  
            Khan T  
            Quinn CM  
            Gibbs KP  
            Pugach O  
            Barker DC  
            Resnick EA  
            Myllyluoma J  
            Chaloupka FJ  
           Field validation of secondary commercial data sources on the
retail food outlet environment in the U.S Health &amp; Place 2011 17 5 1122 1131 available from: ISI:000295858000014 21741875 

            Powell LM  
            Slater S  
            Mirtcheva D  
            Bao Y  
            Chaloupka FJ  
           Food store availability and neighborhood characteristics in the
United States Prev Med 2007b 44 3 189 195 available from: PM:16997358 16997358 

            Powell LM  
            Zhao Z  
            Wang Y  
           Food prices and fruit and vegetable consumption among young
American adults Health Place 2009 15 4 1064 1070 available from: PM:19523869 19523869 

            Rehm CD  
            Monsivais P  
            Drewnowski A  
           The quality and monetary value of diets consumed by adults in the
United States American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2011 94 5 1333 1339 available from: PM:21918223 21918223 

            Reidpath DD  
            Burns C  
            Garrard J  
            Mahoney M  
            Townsend M  
           An ecological study of the relationship between social and
environmental determinants of obesity Health Place 2002 8 2 141 145 available from: PM:11943585 11943585 

            Richardson AS  
            Boone-Heinonen J  
            Popkin BM  
            Gordon-Larsen P  
           Neighborhood fast food restaurants and fast food consumption: a
national study BMC Public Health 2011 11 543 available from: PM:21740571 21740571 

            Robinson PL  
            Dominguez F  
            Teklehaimanot S  
            Lee M  
            Brown A  
            Goodchild M  
           Does distance decay modelling of supermarket accessibility
predict fruit and vegetable intake by individuals in a large metropolitan
area? Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 2013 24 1 Suppl 172 185 available from: PM:23395954 23395954 

            Robinson SM  
            Crozier SR  
            Borland SE  
            Hammond J  
            Barker DJ  
            Inskip HM  
           Impact of educational attainment on the quality of young
women’s diets Eur J Clin Nutr 2004 58 8 1174 1180 available from: PM:15054431 15054431 

            Rose D  
            Bodor JN  
            Hutchinson PL  
            Swalm CM  
           The importance of a multi-dimensional approach for studying the
links between food access and consumption J Nutr 2010 140 6 1170 1174 available from: PM:20410084 20410084 

            Rossen LM  
            Pollack KM  
            Curriero FC  
           Verification of retail food outlet location data from a local
health department using ground-truthing and remote-sensing technology:
Assessing differences by neighborhood characteristics Health &amp; Place 2012 18 5 956 962 available from: ISI:000307730300004 22818588 

            Sadler RC  
            Gilliland JA  
            Arku G  
           A food retail-based intervention on food security and
consumption Int J Environ Res Public Health 2013 10 8 3325 3346 available from: PM:23921626 23921626 

            Sharkey JR  
            Johnson CM  
            Dean WR  
            Horel SA  
           Association between proximity to and coverage of traditional
fast-food restaurants and non-traditional fast-food outlets and fast-food
consumption among rural adults Int J Health Geogr 2011 10 37 available from: PM:21599955 21599955 

            Smoyer-Tomic KE  
            Spence JC  
            Raine KD  
            Amrhein C  
            Cameron N  
            Yasenovskiy V  
            Cutumisu N  
            Hemphill E  
            Healy J  
           The association between neighborhood socioeconomic status and
exposure to supermarkets and fast food outlets Health &amp; Place 2008 14 4 740 754 available from: ISI:000258003000010 18234537 

            Story M  
            Kaphingst KM  
            Robinson-O’Brien R  
            Glanz K  
           Creating healthy food and eating environments: Policy and
environmental approaches Annual Review of Public Health 2008 29 253 + available from: ISI:000255349400019 

            Thompson C  
            Cummins S  
            Brown T  
            Kyle R  
           Understanding interactions with the food environment: An
exploration of supermarket food shopping routines in deprived
neighbourhoods Health Place 2013 19 116 123 available from: PM:23220374 23220374 

            Thornton LE  
            Bentley RJ  
            Kavanagh AM  
           Fast food purchasing and access to fast food restaurants: a
multilevel analysis of VicLANES Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2009 6 28 available from: PM:19473503 19473503 

            Thornton LE  
            Crawford DA  
            Ball K  
           Neighbourhood-socioeconomic variation in women’s diet: the
role of nutrition environments European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2010a 64 12 1423 1432 available from: ISI:000284826200007 20808330 

            Thornton LE  
            Pearce JR  
            Macdonald L  
            Lamb KE  
            Ellaway A  
           Does the choice of neighbourhood supermarket access measure
influence associations with individual-level fruit and vegetable
consumption? A case study from Glasgow Int J Health Geogr 2012 11 29 available from: PM:22839742 22839742 

            Thornton LE  
            Kavanagh AM  
           Understanding the Local Food Environment and
Obesity In Geographies of obesity environmental understandings of the obesity
epidemic 
            Pearce J  
            Witten K  
           Farnham Ashgate 2010b 
United Nations General Assembly 2012 Political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases United Nations New York 66 2 

            Walker RE  
            Keane CR  
            Burke JG  
           Disparities and access to healthy food in the United States: A
review of food deserts literature Health Place 2010 16 5 876 884 available from: PM:20462784 20462784 

            White M  
            Bunting J  
            Williams L  
            Raybould S  
            Adamson A  
            Mathers J  
           Do ‘food deserts’ exist? A multi-level, geographical
analysis of the relationship between retail food access, socio-economic
position and dietary intake 2004 Food Standards Agency 

            Widener MJ  
            Farber S  
            Neutens T  
            Horner MW  
           Using urban commuting data to calculate a spatiotemporal
accessibility measure for food environment studies Health &amp; Place 2013 21 1 9 available from: ISI:000317266200001 23395918 

            Williams L  
            Ball K  
            Crawford D  
           Why do some socioeconomically disadvantaged women eat better than
others? An investigation of the personal, social and environmental
correlates of fruit and vegetable consumption Appetite 2010 55 3 441 446 available from: PM:20728488 20728488 

            Winkler E  
            Turrell G  
            Patterson C  
           Does living in a disadvantaged area entail limited opportunities
to purchase fresh fruit and vegetables in terms of price, availability, and
variety? Findings from the Brisbane Food Study Health Place 2006a 12 4 741 748 available from: PM:16253542 16253542 

            Winkler E  
            Turrell G  
            Patterson C  
           Does living in a disadvantaged area mean fewer opportunities to
purchase fresh fruit and vegetables in the area? Findings from the Brisbane
food study Health Place 2006b 12 3 306 319 available from: PM:16546696 16546696 

            Wrigley N  
            Warm D  
            Margetts B  
           Deprivation, diet, and food-retail access: findings from the
Leeds ‘food deserts’ study Environment and Planning A 2003 35 1 151 188 available from: ISI:000181669300010 

            Zenk SN  
            Schulz AJ  
            Israel BA  
            James SA  
            Bao S  
            Wilson ML  
           Neighborhood racial composition, neighborhood poverty, and the
spatial accessibility of supermarkets in metropolitan
Detroit Am J Public Health 2005 95 4 660 667 available from: PM:15798127 15798127 

            Zenk SN  
            Schulz AJ  
            Matthews SA  
            Odoms-Young A  
            Wilbur J  
            Wegrzyn L  
            Gibbs K  
            Braunschweig C  
            Stokes C  
           Activity space environment and dietary and physical activity
behaviors: a pilot study Health Place 2011 17 5 1150 1161 available from: PM:21696995 21696995 

