LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   81001743087Clin Lab MedClin. Lab. Med.Clinics in laboratory medicine0272-27121557-983226004640444327410.1016/j.cll.2015.02.002NIHMS665017ArticleSalmonella, Shigella, and Yersinia Dekker John Frank Karen Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1508Correspondence: Karen M. Frank, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive MSC 1508, Bethesda, MD 20892-1508, karen.frank@nih.gov1 3 2015 2 4 2015 6 2015 01 6 2016 35 2 225 246 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Synopsis
Salmonella, Shigella, and Yersinia cause a well-characterized spectrum of disease in humans, ranging from asymptomatic carriage to hemorrhagic colitis and fatal typhoidal fever. These pathogens are responsible for millions of cases of food-borne illness in the U.S. each year, with substantial costs measured in hospitalizations and lost productivity. In the developing world, illness caused by these pathogens is not only more prevalent, but is also associated with a greater case-fatality rate. Classical methods for identification rely on selective media and serology, but newer methods based on mass spectrometry and PCR show great promise for routine clinical testing.


          Salmonella
        
          Shigella
        
          Yersinia
        EntericGram-negative bacilligastroenteritis
   Introduction
In this review, we discuss three enteric pathogens: Salmonella, Shigella, and Yersinia. These important members of Enterobacteriaceae are responsible for significant morbidity and mortality, causing diarrhea and a spectrum of associated symptoms from mild to severe in most parts of the world. In this review, we cover infection and epidemiology, taxonomic classification, collection, transport, and storage of specimens, culture techniques, molecular detection methods, susceptibility testing, and treatment. Discussions that pertain to individual organisms are organized into individual sections starting with Salmonella, followed by Shigella, then Yersinia. Topics common to all three (such as collection, transport and storage of specimens, and molecular multiplex methods of detection) are discussed as they first occur, denoted as such in paragraph headings. Throughout, priority of discussion is placed on newer techniques and data, with less emphasis on details of classical methods available in reference textbooks.

Salmonella Introduction
Members of the genus Salmonella cause a well-characterized spectrum of disease in humans, ranging from asymptomatic carriage to fatal typhoidal fever. In the developed world, food-borne acute gastroenteritis and enterocolitis are the most common forms of Salmonella infection, with an estimated 1.2 million annual cases of non-typhoidal Salmonellosis occurring in the U.S.1–3 Though relatively uncommon in the U.S., typhoid, paratyphoid, and enteric fever constitute a very serious global public health problem, with 25 million new infections and &gt;200,000 deaths occurring annually.4, 5

Salmonella is a member of the Enterobacteriaceae, originally characterized by their ability to metabolize citrate as a sole carbon source and lysine as a nitrogen source, as well as their ability to produce hydrogen sulfide.6 However, classical biochemical testing alone does not unambiguously distinguish key pathogenic members of this genus and modern classification relies instead on serology and increasingly on molecular methods.

Salmonella Disease Manifestations
Infection with Salmonella typically follows two very different disease courses, depending on whether the infecting Salmonella strain is a typhoidal or non-typhoidal serovar. Infection with non-typhoidal serovars ordinarily presents as diarrhea associated with fever and abdominal cramping 12–72 hours after infection.7 In most cases in healthy individuals, this infection runs a self-limited course over 4–7 days but, in susceptible hosts, certain non-typhoidal strains of Salmonella may spread systemically to other sites in the body. Though this is more common in those with compromised immune systems or underlying medical conditions (e.g., sickle cell anemia), systemic spread of non-typhoidal Salmonella strains may be seen in otherwise healthy individuals as well.

In contrast to infection with non-typhoidal Salmonella, infection with typhoidal strains (primarily serovars Typhi and Paratyphi) presents as a systemic, often serious, disease. After invading through intestinal mucosa, typhoidal strains disseminate through a transient primary bacteremia that may occur without diarrhea.5 Following hematogenous dissemination, some individuals will develop typhoid fever, which involves high temperature (&gt;39° C), vomiting, and headache, sometimes with complications that include neurologic involvement, intestinal perforation and death.5

Salmonella Taxonomic classification
The classification of the salmonellae has a complicated history, resulting in part from multiple independent investigators using phenotypic, serologic, and genotypic methods to characterize phylogenetic relationships within the genus, and in part from disagreements on nomenclature. The most recent consensus defines a classification scheme that recognizes two principle species of Salmonella: S. enterica and S. bongori (Figure 1). In this scheme, S. enterica is further classified into six subspecies: Subspecies I, or S. enterica subsp. enterica; Subspecies II, or S. enterica subsp. salamae; Subspecies IIIa, or S. enterica subsp. arizonae; Subspecies IIIb, or S. enterica subsp. diarizonae; Subspecies IV, or S. enterica subsp. houtenae; and Subspecies VI, or S. enterica subsp. indica.8–10 Recent sequence analysis has shed light on the genetic relationships within this genus and has largely supported the above classification scheme.4, 11–20

The seven principle members of the Salmonella genus can be further subtyped by serologic methods, based on three antigens: O, H, and Vi. The serologic typing scheme identifies &gt;2500 serovars.21 The resolution provided by serologic typing methods has proved valuable to epidemiologic tracking of isolates in outbreaks. Given that S. enterica subsp. enterica strains constitute the majority (as much as 99.5%) of isolates cultured from humans and other warm-blooded animals, it is perhaps not surprising that the majority of disease causing serovars belong to this subspecies.6, 21 In contrast, S. bongori and the other members of S. enterica are more commonly isolated from cold-blooded animals and environmental sources, and Salmonellosis caused by serovars representing these other species is relatively rare, though infections do occur.

Collection, Transport and Storage of Specimens for Detection of Salmonella/Shigella/Yersinia
For laboratory diagnosis in cases of gastrointestinal disease, fecal specimens should be collected at the early stages of illness, ideally before antibiotics have been initiated.6, 22 Whole stools are the preferred specimen for culture, and examination of multiple specimens may improve the recovery of Salmonella/Shigella/Yersinia.23 Consultation with the laboratory may be required where specimen rejection rules do not allow for serial cultures. Most commonly used pH-buffered stool transport media are compatible with recovery of Salmonella/Shigella/Yersina, though Cary-Blair transport medium is preferred by many labs, due to its compatibility with other common stool pathogens.6, 22

Fecal specimens should be examined immediately on receipt, or stored at 4° C if plating for culture or inoculation of broth will be delayed for greater than 1–2 hours following collection.6, 22 However, it should be noted that refrigeration of specimens containing Shigella in non-pH-buffered transport media may decrease recovery in culture.22 In cases of suspected systemic spread, as with typhoidal Salmonella, cultures from other sources (blood, bone marrow, lymph node, and bone biopsy) that may be submitted should be collected and transported according to standard procedures appropriate to these specimen types.

Salmonella Culture and Isolation
Stool culture is the most common source from which non-typhoidal serovars of Salmonella are recovered. Non-typhoidal strains of Salmonella may also be recovered from blood and tissue (lymph node, bone marrow, etc.) in cases with systemic spread. Typhoidal strains may be more easily isolated from cultures of extra-intestinal sites than from fecal cultures.6

Salmonella may be cultured on a variety of solid media. Typically, two selective and differential media, one of which is highly selective, are inoculated with the stool specimen. Hektoen and xylose-lysine-deoxycholate (XLD) agars are highly selective and both detect H2S production, facilitating identification of Salmonella species. More highly selective agars, including Salmonella-Shigella, bismuth sulfite, and brilliant green agars may inhibit some strains of Salmonella sp., and thus are often used in combination with a less selective agar.22 For this reason, a less selective differential enteric medium, such as MacConkey or eosin methylene blue, and a nonselective medium, such as 5% sheep blood agar may be inoculated in addition as part of the stool culture work up, depending on lab preference.22 However, the growth of fecal flora on non-selective agars may obscure Salmonella colonies that are present in low numbers.

Stool may be inoculated into enrichment broths in addition to plated cultures. Enrichment broths serve to allow the growth of Salmonella while suppressing the growth of normal fecal flora, and thereby can improve recovery yield. Two commonly used enrichment broths are tetrathionate broth and selenite broth.22 Once isolated, Salmonella should be sub-cultured using standard techniques to obtain colonies for identification and susceptibility testing (if indicated), as well as for submission to the local public health laboratory.

Identification Methods for Salmonella
Once Salmonella has been isolated in culture, there are a variety of methods available for identification and classification.6 Definitive identification ordinarily relies on a combination of phenotypic and serologic methods. The widely-used Kauffmann-White serologic typing scheme is based on the LPS O antigen, the H1 and H2 flagellar antigens, and the Vi antigen.21 While the O and H1 antigens are detectable in almost all strains of Salmonella, the H2 antigens are present only in certain strains and the Vi antigen is found predominantly in typhoidal strains.6 It should be noted that Vi, though useful for detection of serovar Typhi, may also be expressed in Citrobacter sp. and therefore the Vi antigen alone cannot be used for definitive identification.6

O/H/Vi typing by the Kauffmann-White scheme yields greater than 2500 serovars, which may be designated by antigenic formulae expressed with the following convention: O antigen(s), Vi antigen if present: phase 1 H antigens(s):phase 2 H antigen(s) if present 6, 21. In the Kauffman-White scheme, the &gt;1500 serovars from S. enterica subsp. enterica receive names; those from the other subspecies of S. enterica and S. bongeri are referred to only by formulae.21 By convention serovar names are capitalized and not italicized, and it is not necessary to include the enterica subspecies designation when referring to the serovar, as only subspecies enterica serovars are named. Thus both S. enterica subsp. enterica ser. Enteriditis and S. enterica ser. Enteriditis are correct designations 21. It is important to note that serovars do not have taxonomic status and should not be confused with species or subspecies of Salmonella.

As stated above, the majority of identified serovars and the majority of human pathogens belong to S. enterica subsp. enterica. Some serovars, such as Typhi and Paratyphi are largely restricted to humans. Other serovars are generally restricted to particular zoonotic reservoirs and only occasionally cause human infection. However, infections caused by these serovars may be severe with systemic spread. These species include Derby and Choleraesuis (pig-adapted), Saintpaul (poultry-adapted), and Dublin (bovine-adapted).6 Yet other serovars, particularly Typhimurium and Enteritidis pass between human and zoonotic reservoirs with ease, perhaps accounting for their high prevalence. CDC Survey data from 2011 suggests that the three most commonly reported serovars in the U.S. during the reporting period were Enteritidis, Typhimurium, and Newport.24 Non-typhoidal Salmonellosis was traditionally associated with meat and poultry products, but more recently outbreaks have been caused increasingly by produce.1–3

A number of techniques now exist for screening of primary specimens and enrichment broths before isolated colonies are available for the above methods. Selenite enrichment broth cultures may be screened by the Wellcolex Color Salmonella (Remel Inc., Lenexa, KS), a serologic agglutination-based method.25 There are important limitations in sensitivity and specificity that one must be aware of with the Wellcolex test; in particular, expression of Vi antigen in Citrobacter sp. and may lead to false positives with this assay and not all Salmonella sp. are identified by this test.26

Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing for Salmonella
Current CLSI guidelines 27 state that routine susceptibility testing is indicated for typhoidal Salmonella serovars (Typhi and Paratyphi A-C) from all sites, and for non-typhoidal serovars from extra-intestinal sites. Fecal isolates should be tested for susceptibility to ampicillin, a fluoroquinolone, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. For extra-intestinal isolates of Salmonella, a third-generation cephalosporin should be tested and reported additionally, and chloramphenicol may be tested and reported if requested. It should be noted that 1st and 2nd generation cephalosporins, cephamycins and aminoglycosides may appear active in vitro against Salmonella, but are not effective clinically and should not be reported as susceptible.27

Current CLSI breakpoints for ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin for Salmonella are lower than for other Enterobacteriaceae.27 CLSI recommends that laboratories unable to implement the current (lowered) MIC breakpoints for fluoroquinolone testing should use nalidixic acid to test for reduced fluoroquinolone susceptibility. Strainsresistant to nalidixic acid may be associated with clinical fluoroquinolone failures. Salmonella strains producing ESBL beta-lactamases and NDM-1 type carbapenemases have been reported, as well as S. enterica ser. Typhi isolates with chromosomally-integrated multi-drug resistance islands.28–30 It is therefore important for the laboratory and clinicians to be aware of the possibility of multi-drug- and carbapenem-resistant isolates.

Identification of Salmonella/Shigella/Yersinia by Mass Spectrometry
Molecular methods, including mass spectrometry and PCR-based multiplex panels have been developed for the detection of enteric bacteria, and some laboratories are beginning to incorporate these techniques. These newer methods have the potential to improve our ability to provide rapid and accurate bacterial identification, but they have limitations that are important to understand. Commercial matrix assisted laser desorption ionization – time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) instruments can provide rapid identifications of Salmonella and Yersinia, and limited identification of Shigella.31, 32 Both the Bruker Biotyper and Biomerieux Vitek MS MALDI-TOF MS systems are FDA approved for in vitro diagnostic use to identify cultured isolates of Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis (species level identification) and Salmonella (genus level identification), but not Shigella. The Biomerieux Vitex MS system carries a manufacturer’s note that confirmatory testing is recommended when identifications of Salmonella are made. Neither system is FDA approved for species-level or serovar-level classifications of Salmonella. However, recent literature suggests that MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry-based systems may have the power to distinguish among subspecies and some Salmonella serovars.33 As this technology is new and experience is still relatively limited, caution is appropriate, as illustrated by a recent report of a patient with both bacteremia and gastrointestinal symptoms for whom an isolate of Y. pseudotuberculosis was misidentified as Y. pestis using a MALDI-TOF MS method. This highlights the need for comprehensive MALDI-TOF MS spectral databases in combination with careful validations and appropriate additional confirmatory testing for this group of less commonly seen bacteria.34

Pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) has been used extensively for epidemiologic typing of strains of Salmonella. Recently, a variety of molecular methods have been developed for distinguishing among strains of Salmonella/Shigella/Yersina, including multi-locus sequence typing approaches, and PCR-based approaches.35–42 Whole genome sequencing-based approaches have also been used, facilitated by published reference genomes.13, 14, 43–45

PCR-Based Molecular Methods to Detect Salmonella/Shigella/Yersinia
Recently, a number of PCR-based multiplex GI pathogen identification panels have been marketed for use with primary stool specimens. These include the bioMerieux Biofire Filmarray system,46 BD MAX system,47 Luminex xTAG system,48, 49 Savyon Diagnostics system,48 and Genetic Signatures system.50 These panels allow rapid identification of Salmonella, Shigella, and Yersinia from primary stool specimens, and offer substantially improved turnaround time on primary laboratory diagnosis compared with culture-based methods. Recovery of isolates from culture is still required for taxonomic classification and susceptibility testing. It should be noted that none of the commercially available multiplex PCR panels include Y. pseudotuberculosis in the target list.

Though experience with these new panels is still relatively limited, a number of recent publications have begun to shed light on their performance. Wessels et al. found that in comparison with conventional diagnostic methods, the Luminex xTAG panel reported almost twice as many pathogen identifications.51 However, not all of these positive results were confirmed by independent PCR assays, including one Shigella sp. and four Salmonella sp. out of a total of 83 positives reported by the instrument. The authors therefore recommended that confirmatory testing be performed before reporting Salmonella with this method. A study of Luminex xTAG ASR reagents demonstrated sensitivity for Salmonella of 92% and for Shigella of 93%.52 Conclusions regarding the sensitivity of this assay for detecting Yersinia sp. were limited by the inclusion of only 3 isolates.52 A study comparing the Biofire FilmArray and Luminex xTAG systems demonstrated higher positivity rate with both assays compared to routine methods; however, presumed false positives were observed, consistent with other studies.46 The Genetics Signatures EasyScreen system tested in Australia showed very good correlation of results between conventional and molecular methods for Salmonella, but evaluation of performance for the detection of Shigella and Yersinia was limited by the small numbers of isolates of these genera included in the study.50 Adequate validation of these multiplexed panels can be quite difficult due to the number of pathogens that must be tested, and the need to verify all presumed false positives with another equivalently-sensitive method. Significant testing and experience should be accumulated before a lab considers replacing traditional methods with a single molecular method.

Another approach under investigation is PCR electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (PCR-ESI-MS). Pierce et al. evaluated a PCR-ESI-MS-based assay for testing of enteric pathogens in food samples that employed broad-range oligonucleotide primers targeted to highly conserved regions in the genomes of target organisms 53. Salmonella was detected in samples tested by this method with high sensitivity, but Shigella was detected in only 81% of cases. As with MALDI-TOF MS-based methods, PCR-ESI-MS-based assays are very dependent on the completeness of the database. In this study, identification of bacteria from food samples required the use of selective enrichment media and additional incubation time. Further work is needed to incorporate this method into routine use by food safety investigators.53

Shigella Epidemiology, Disease Manifestations &amp; Treatment
Symptoms of Shigella infection include fever, malaise, watery diarrhea, cramping abdominal pain, and myalgia. The incubation period is 1–4 days, and the illness often resolves in 5–7 days. After 2–3 days, the volume and frequency of diarrhea may decrease to be replaced with blood and mucus in feces (dysentery), along with straining. Some individuals may not have symptoms, but can still transmit the bacteria to others.54 Although not as frequent as gastrointestinal disease, there are multiple reports of bacteremia and other extraintestinal infections.55–57 Complications of Shigella infection include hemolytic uremic syndrome, and reactive arthritis.58

The worldwide incidence of shigellosis has been reported to be approximately 165 million cases, but the mortality has decreased substantially over the past three decades.59–61 Though the causes of this decrease in shigellosis-associated mortality are likely to be multifactorial, it has occurred along with a decrease in prevalence of S. dysenteriae type 1.61 Infection with S. dysenteriae type 1 carries relatively high mortality in the developing world, as demonstrated by the case fatality rate of 5–15% in Africa and Central America. There are an estimated 500,000 cases of shigellosis per year in the U.S. with 38 deaths.62

The only known natural reservoirs of Shigella are humans and large primates. Shigellosis is highly infectious, with a minimum inoculum of only 10–100 organisms required to cause disease.63 Outbreaks often occur in the summer months. Transmission is through the fecal-oral route, with spread occurring person-to-person, and through consumption of water or food contaminated with feces from infected individuals. Not surprisingly, shigellosis seen more commonly under conditions that facilitate spread of bacteria through the fecal-oral route, such as in daycare centers or in areas without indoor plumbing. Outbreaks have additionally been described among people in custodial institutions, orthodox Jews, international travelers, and men who have sex with men.64–68 Asymptomatic infection is associated with the spread of disease and prolongation of outbreaks due to silent transmission. Severe intestinal and extra-intestinal manifestations can occur with all four species of Shigella, but are most common with S. dysenteriae type 1, due in part to the production of Shiga toxin.69 Infections due to S. dysenteriae are often acquired by international travel and are often multidrug resistant.70 Shigellosis due to S. boydii is uncommon, and limited to the Indian subcontinent.71
S. sonnei is endemic in the United States and other developed countries. Infections associated with S. sonnei tend to be mild or asymptomatic.

Antimicrobial therapy has been demonstrated to decrease the duration, transmission, and severity of symptoms. A decision to treat is based on severity of symptoms, and on the desire to reduce spread, balanced against the goal to reduce the development of more resistant isolates. In the U.S., shigellosis is reportable to state-level public health labs, and Shigella resistance is tracked by the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System for Enteric Bacteria, a collaboration of multiple U.S. government agencies.

Shigella Laboratory Identification
Shigella, a member of the Enterobacteriaceae family, is classified into four serologic subgroups: S. dysenteriae (Group A), S. flexneri (Group B), S. boydii (Group C), and S. sonnei (Group D). Though many authors have treated these subgroups of Shigella as distinct taxonomic species, Escherichia coli and Shigella are very similar genetically (80–90%), and the argument has been made that almost all Shigella strains could be considered a biotype of E. coli.72
S. boydii 13 is the exception and has been reclassified as Escherichia albertii.73, 74 Because of their substantial genetic similarity, distinguishing Shigella from E. coli often presents a challenge for the clinical microbiology laboratory. However, though they are genetically similar, Shigella and non-Shiga toxin-producing strains of E. coli demonstrate different clinical behavior, and their distinction in the microbiology laboratory facilitates their continued epidemiological tracking as distinct entities.

To optimize detection of Shigella in stool, samples should be plated on MacConkey and either xylose-lysine-deoxycholate, Hektoen enteric, or deoxycholate citrate agar. Colonies are bluish-green on Hektoen agar and do not have the black center seen with Salmonella, as Shigella do not produce H2S. Shigella do not ferment lactose and xylose and are relatively inert biochemically. Some strains of S. sonnei are exceptions and may ferment lactose. Most isolates do not produce gas, except some S. flexneri.6, 75 Appropriate colonies can be characterized further using Kligler iron or triple sugar iron agar. Lysine decarboxylase tests are typically negative for Shigella. Groups A, B, and C have similar biochemical characteristics, but S. sonnei has ornithine decarboxylase activity and beta-galactosidase activity.75

Serologic typing should be performed on Shigella isolates. Subgroup A (S. dysenteriae) has 17 serotypes, subgroup B (S. flexneri) has 14 serotypes further divided into subserotypes, subgroup C (S. boydii) has 19 serotypes, and subgroup D (S. sonnei) is a single serotype.76, 77 Confirmation of identification and serotype should be performed at a reference lab or public health lab for isolates from extraintestinal infections, or when the primary lab does not have full serotyping capabilities. Enteroinvasive E. coli are evolutionary intermediates between E. coli and Shigella.78 Some of the enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) may cross-react with Shigella anti-sera. It should be noted that serological testing of the serum of an infected individual is generally not useful for diagnosis.

Active or typical E. coli strains can be distinguished from Shigella by several tests, including lysine decarboxylase, motility, gas production, acetate utilization, and mucate and lactose fermentation. However, inactive strains of E. coli can have overlapping reactions with Shigella. Inactive strains of E. coli that are nonmotile, anerogenic biotypes are called Alkalescens-Dispar bioserotypes. In order to address this issue, different laboratories have developed different algorithms for the work-up of E coli and Shigella in stool specimens; however, many labs do not employ procedures to distinguish E. coli from Shigella when isolated from other body sites.

Given that E. coli is a much more common isolate to recover from most sterile site cultures than Shigella, and given that many labs restrict procedures to distinguish Shigella from E. coli to stool specimens, a Shigella occurring in a sterile site specimen may be misidentified as an E. coli. This is especially likely if identification is dependent on an automated system, as commercial systems such as the Vitek 2 have a high rate of misidentification.79 There are a number of reports examining API20E strips for the identification of Shigella, with varying reports of accuracy.80–83 If a Shigella isolate from an extra-intestinal site were misidentified as an E. coli, the reflex susceptibility performed and reported would be that appropriate for an E. coli isolate. However, the CLSI guidelines differ for the two organisms, with first and second generation cephalosporins, cephamycins, and aminoglycosides excluded from testing for Shigella isolates, as false in vitro susceptibility my occur.27 As a consequence, a Shigella misidentified from a site such as blood, could mistakenly be treated with an ineffective agent (e.g. aminoglycoside), with possible clinical failure. Furthermore, such a case could be missed in the tracking of Shigella incidence, unless Shigella was isolated from a concurrent stool specimen. An algorithm to distinguish E. coli and Shigella is presented in Figure 2.72

Given the long-standing difficulty in distinguishing Shigella from E. coli, some newer methods have been evaluated. Khot and Fisher applied ClinProTools software from Bruker Daltonics to develop and algorithm to distinguish Shigella from E. coli using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. The 3% rate of misidentification these authors achieved is better than that seen with automated biochemical instruments. However, given the still significant error rates, such an approach does not obviate the need for traditional biochemical approaches.84

Guidelines have been written to test all stool of all patients with acute, community-acquired diarrhea for Shiga-toxin producing E. coli, because selective testing strategies such as testing only bloody stool, or stool from children, or during summer months, fail to detect all positive samples.85 Due to low prevalence, not all hospitals have chosen to test all such stool samples. The Shiga toxin produced by S. dysenteriae type 1 is very similar to the Shiga toxin 1 produced by some enterohemorrhagic E. coli, so some rapid assays may detect the toxin from either E. coli or this specific Shigella species.86–88
Shigellas that do not produce the toxin should not be detected with those assays. It should be noted that Shiga toxin-encoding genes can be detected in healthy volunteers by PCR of fecal samples, so correlation with clinical symptoms and culture of an isolate are essential for diagnosis when using this type of molecular assay.89

Shigella Susceptibility Testing
Shigella solates should be tested against ampicillin, a fluoroquinolone, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.27 There is significant resistance to ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.68, 90 In Asia, resistance has been reported to ciprofloxacin, pivmecillinam, and azithromycin, with some emerging resistance to third-generation cepholosporins and additional drugs.91–96 A recent report from studies in Bangladesh show an increase in resistance to ciprofloxacin from 0% in 2004 to 44% in 2010.97

Shigella Virulence Mechanism
Shigella pathogenesis involves translocation through ileal and colonic M cells, uptake by macrophages, basolateral invasion of epithelial cells, and dissemination within the mucosa.98, 99
Shigella has a large virulence plasmid, encoding a Type III-secretion system and a set of secreted proteins. The system results in the injection of virulence factors into host colonic epithelial cells, leading to damage to the epithelial lining, as well as proteins that antagonize the adaptive and innate immune response.98, 100
Shigella virulence is enhanced by the presence of enterotoxins, which is separate from the Shiga toxin produced in limited strains.101 The genes encoding the Shiga toxin genes are located in the genome of heterogeneous lambdoid prophages. These are highly mobile genetic elements that play a role in horizontal gene transfer and genome diversification.102 Shiga toxin is made by the Shigella dysenteriae type I strains and E. coli O157:H7 among other E. coli shiga toxin-producing strains. Shiga-like toxin II, also seen in some E. coli strains is 56% homologous with Shiga toxin (or Shiga-like toxin I).103

Shigella Vaccine
The declining incidence of shigellosis with increasing age suggests that natural immunity develops, implying that vaccines eliciting this natural response may be effective. There is currently no licensed Shigella vaccine, but there are multiple vaccines are in preclinical stages or clinical trials, including live attenuated, killed whole-cell, conjugate, and subunit vaccines.104 Vaccines have been designed against the O antigens, and also conjugate vaccines have been developed using several different conserved antigenic molecules.101 Data are limited regarding the immune parameter that correlates with protective immunity.77 More studies are needed before we will know if a Shigella vaccine will prove effective.

Yersinia Epidemiology &amp; Disease Manifestations
Yersinia are zoonotic agents distributed worldwide and there are both pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains.105
Yersinia species associated with human disease include Y. pseudotuberculosis, Y. enterocolitica, and Y. pestis. Of these clinically significant species, we will discuss only Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis, as this review is focused on enteric pathogens. Disease due to Y. enterocolitica manifests as terminal ileitis, lymphadenitis, and acute enterocolitis due to ingestion of contaminated food or water. Symptoms typically develop 4–7 days after exposure and may last 1–3 weeks. Complications include skin rash, joint pains, and bacteremia.106 Right-sided abdominal pain in some cases of Y. enterocolitica infection may be confused with appendicitis. Illness may include erythema nodosum, polyarthritis, and less commonly septicemia or endocarditis.107–110 Reactive arthritis is an uncommon complication, but may be seen in especially in immunocompromised patients and those with the HLA-B27 allele. Associated disorders also include inflammatory bowel disease and autoimmune thyroid disorders. Iron overload due to underlying conditions, such as hereditary hemochromatosis or beta thalassemia, or treatment with deferoxamine, leads to an increased susceptibility to septicemia manifestations.105, 111

Infections with Y. enterocolitica are more common in the winter months and often seen in young children. There is one culture-confirmed case of Y. enterocolitica per 100,000 individuals each year in the United States. The CDC tracks foodborne disease with the surveillance network, FoodNet. The source of infection can include contaminated prepackaged deli meats, undercooked pork, unpasteurized milk, or untreated water. Preparation of chitterlings (large intestines of pigs), a dish for holiday meals, has been associated with multiple cases of infection in infants, due to caregivers handling of the contaminated food112–117 This organism is able to multiply at refrigerated temperatures, contributing to its role in food products and transfusion-related infections.118

Y. pseudotuberculosis is endemic in a variety of animals, including fowl. Y. pseudotuberculosis usually produces a self-limited disease. The infection can manifest as mesenteric lymphadenitis, and may also be confused with appendicitis.119 Septicemic illness is rare and if seen, would most likely occur in someone with underlying disorders that increase susceptibility to severe infection.120–122
Y. pseudotuberculosis has been reported as a foodborne pathogen.123, 124

Yersinia Laboratory Identification
Yersinia is a gram-negative bacillus in the Enterobacteriacae family. There are 11 species of Yersina, but only three are clearly human pathogens.75 Genome sequencing reveals that Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis are closely related, but significantly different than Y. enterocolitica.125
Yersinia can appear small and coccobacillary in Gram-stained smears. It exhibits bipolar staining described as a safety pin shape on Giemsa staining. Yersinia grow on blood, chocolate, and MacConkey agar, but may be overgrown by other organisms due to slow growth. Yersinia can form pinpoint colonies on both blood agar and MacConkey agar in 24 hours, particularly Y. pseudotuberculosis. Yersinia are catalase positive, oxidase negative and ferment glucose. Yersinia species have an alkaline over acid pattern on Kligler Iron Agar and are nonmotile at 36°C, but motile at 22°C. Optimal growth is observed at 25–32°C. Longer incubation reveals grey-white, 1–2 mm, convex colonies. Y. enterocolitica appears as small, lactose-negative colonies on MacConkey in 48 hours. Selective media, such as cefsulodin-irgasan-novobiocin (CIN) and incubation at lower temperatures can enhance detection. Colonies appear as a bull’s-eye with a red center on CIN agar, although some other bacteria will also give this appearance. Use of eosin methylene blue agar and triple-sugar iron agar may not result in a clear distinction from other coliforms. Y. enterocolitica incubated at room temperature will be more biochemically active and better identification at this temperature may be obtained with some systems such as API 20E, because commercial systems such as Vitek may fail to identify these organisms under routine conditions.126, 127

Y. pseudotuberculosis is a pleomorphic gram-negative bacillus that can grow at temperatures ranging from 4°C to 43°C, with optimal temperatures between 25–28°C.128 Enteric Yersinia species can be distinguished biochemically; ornithine decarboxylase, sucrose, and sorbitol are all positive for Y. enterocolitica and negative for Y. pseudotuberculosis. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays and lateral-flow assays exist, but are not commonly used for routine labs, instead being used primarily in research.

Yersinia Serogroups
Of the six biovars of Y. enterocolitica (1A, 1B, 2, 3, 4), , five are pathogenic for humans.129 It has been proposed that biotype 1A strains may represent a potential group of emerging pathogens. They can be identified in clinical specimens, but clear association with human disease has not been established.130 Serology has been used in investigations of plague infections caused by Y. pestis, in cases when an organism was not recovered in culture. However, serology for Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis is somewhat limited by cross-reactions due to infections with other bacterial species, and due to human exposure to nonpathogenic Yersinia species.

Yersinia Virulence
One virulence factors of Yersinia is yersiniabactin , a siderophore iron uptake system present in virulent Yersinia, including Y. pestis, Y. pseudotuberculosis, and Y. enterocolitica biotype 1B. The genes involved in the biosynthesis, transport, and regulation of yeriniabactin are located on a mobile genetic element, the high-pathogenicity island. This mobile element has contributed to the horizontal spread of yersiniabactin genes into other Enterobacteriacae. In addition, Yersina species contain alternative iron siderophore scavenging systems, with some strains containing all three systems, yersiniabactin, pseudochelin, and yersiniachelin.131

Y. pseudotuberculosis has a virulence plasmid, pYV, that carries a type III secretion system that forms a needle structure on the bacterial surface for the injection of Yersinia outer membrane proteins (Yops) into target host cells. This system results in disruption of both the innate and adaptive immune response, inhibiting phagocytosis.128

Yersinia Susceptibility Testing
Some Y. enterocolitica have chromosomally encoded beta lactamases, conferring resistance to ampicillin, cephalothin, and carbenicillin. Treatment of Y. enterocolitica may include an aminoglycoside, doxycycline, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, a third-generation cephalosporin, or a fluoroquinolone.106 There is significant resistance to fluoroquinolones in some regions, due to mutation of the gyr A gene and efflux mechanisms.132
Y. pseudotuberculosis infections do not usually require treatment, but bacteremia may be treated with ampicillin, tetracycline, or streptomycin. The organism is usually susceptible to extended-specturm cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.133

Chronic disease associated with Salmonella/Shigella/Yersinia Infections
An examination of cases of gastroenteritis due to Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, or Yersinia in US military personnel lead to a report of a higher incidence of chronic health sequelae than some previous reports.134 Pathogen-specific increases were observed with associated increased risk of irritable bowel disease, dyspepsia, constipation, and gastroesophogeal reflux disease, with a relative risk of 13.1 for inflammatory bowel disease following Yersinia infection. Three separate metaanalyses have shown a significantly increased risk of irritable bowel syndrome following gastroenteritis due to Shigella.135–137

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Figure 1 Relationships within the Salmonella genus, including species, subspecies, and serovar designations are illustrated. Note that serovars do not have official taxonomic status. Four representative serovars are shown for S. enterica subsp. enterica. Only the most common typhyoidal serovars, and representative non-typhoidal serovars are shown. There are greater than 2500 serovars in total, with the most common disease-causing serovars belonging to S. enterica subsp. Enterica.

Figure 2 Key for differentiation of Shigella, enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC), and noninvasive Escherichia coli. (From van den Beld MJ, Reubsaet FA. Differentiation between Shigella, enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC) and noninvasive Escherichia coli. European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 2012;31(6):899–904; with permission)


          Based on Edwards and Ewing’s identification of Enterobacteriaceae, 4th edition, 1986 and/or Cowan and Steel’s manual for the identification of medical bacteria, 3rd edition, 1993.

Performed with a standard PCR protocol, with primers designed to amplify a part of the conserved region of ipaH7.8, as described by Buysse et al., Microb. Pathog. 19(5):335–349.

Incubated for 24 h in BHI-medium at 37°C.

Known O:H serotypes of EIEC according to Bergey’s manual of Systematic Bacteriology, 2nd edition, volume 2, The Proteobacteria, Part B The Gammaproteobacteria.


        

Key points
The global disease burden from Salmonella/Shigella/Yersinia, organisms reportable to public health departments, is quite high, with significant but fewer infections in the developed world.

Although there is a broad spectrum of disease associated with these pathogens, infections are self-limiting in the majority of cases. Antimicrobial therapy is ordinarily indicated only for severe gastrointestinal and systemic disease.

Inactive strains of E. coli can be difficult to distinguish from Shigella strains, using multiple laboratory methods.

Molecular methods such as PCR and mass spectrometry are being used more routinely for identification of these organisms, but both methods have limitations.

There is active investigation in the areas of vaccine development and characterization of virulence mechanisms.

Box 1 Prevention of Yersinia Infections
Avoid raw or undercooked pork.

Avoid unpasteurized milk and milk products.

Wash hands with soap and water before preparing food or eating, and after contact with animals or raw meat.

Avoid contact with young children while preparing raw chitterlings.

Clean all kitchen boards and utensils after preparing raw meat.

Dispose of animal feces in a sanitary manner.

(From Yersinia. National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nczved/divisions/dfbmd/diseases/yersinia/)

Box 2 Barriers to development of a Shigella Vaccine
We have a limited understanding of protective immunity for Shigella.

There are any serotypes of Shigella.

There is a lack of an adequate animal model.

Concerns of producing reactive arthritis in vaccine trial recipients.

Concerns of gastrointestinal tract side effects or chronic conditions.

Challenges in manufacturing process.

Some promote funding for clean water and sanitation over vaccine studies.

From Barry EM, Pasetti MF, Sztein MB, et al. Progress and pitfalls in Shigella vaccine research. Nature reviews Gastroenterology &amp; hepatology 2013;10(4):245–255; with permission.

SELF ASSESSMENT
Which of the following statements is true regarding Salmonella?

S. bongeri is a common cause of Salmonellosis in humans.

Typhus is caused by a serovar of S. enterica subsp. Indica.

Serovars of Salmonella have official taxonomic status similar to the named Salmonella subspecies.

Typhoidal strains of Salmonella are more likely to cause systemic disease than non-typhoidal strains.

Unpasteurized milk products are the most common source of human Salmonella infection in the U.S.

Which of the following statements is true regarding Shigella?

Diarrhea from Shigella infection is almost always bloody.

All patients with Shigella infection should receive antibiotics promptly to avoid sequelae.

The black-centered colony on Hektoen agar is characteristic for Shigella.

Two of the four groups of Shigella species typically carry the shiga toxin gene.

Inactive strains of E. coli are very difficult to distinguish from Shigella with multiple laboratory identification systems.

Which of the following statements is true regarding Yersinia?

Y. pestis, Y. enterocolitica, and Y. pseudotuberculosis all have equally similar genomes.

It is common for patients with Y. enterocolitica to have bacteremia as a complication.

There is currently no role for MALDI-TOF MS in the identification of Yersinia due to the poor performance in published studies.

There are multiple reports of chronic gastrointestinal diseases as sequelae of Yersinia infections.

There are 50 serotypes of Yersinia known to be pathogenic in humans.

Answers to multiple choice questions
D

E

D


   References
1 
            Patrick ME  
            Adcock PM  
            Gomez TM  
             
           Salmonella enteritidis infections, United States, 1985–1999 Emerging infectious diseases 2004 10 1 1 7 15078589 
2 
            Braden CR  
           Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis and eggs: a national epidemic in the United States Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America 2006 43 4 512 517 16838242 
3 
            Hanning IB  
            Nutt JD  
            Ricke SC  
           Salmonellosis outbreaks in the United States due to fresh produce: sources and potential intervention measures Foodborne pathogens and disease 2009 6 6 635 648 19580447 
4 
            Holt KE  
            Thomson NR  
            Wain J  
             
           Pseudogene accumulation in the evolutionary histories of Salmonella enterica serovars Paratyphi A and Typhi BMC genomics 2009 10 36 19159446 
5 
            Dougan G  
            Baker S  
           Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi and the pathogenesis of typhoid fever Annual review of microbiology 2014 68 317 336 
6 
            Nataro JP  
            Bopp CA  
            Fields PI  
            Kaper JB  
            Strockbine NA  
            Escherichia  
            Shigella  
            Salmonella  
           
            Versalovic J  
            Carroll KC  
            Funke G  
            Jorgensen JH  
            Landry ML  
            Warnock DW  
           Manual of Clinical Microbiology 2011 1 10th ed. Washington, D.C ASM Press 603 626 
7 
            www.cdc.gov/salmonella/general/ 
           
8 
            Le Minor LaP M  
           Dsignation of Salmonella enterica sp. nov., nom. rev., as the Type and Only Species of the Genus Salmonella International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 1987 37 4 465 468 
9 
            Euzeby JP  
           Revised Salmonella nomenclature: designation of Salmonella enterica (ex Kauffmann and Edwards 1952) Le Minor and Popoff 1987 sp. nov., nom. rev. as the neotype species of the genus Salmonella Lignieres 1900 (approved lists 1980), rejection of the name Salmonella choleraesuis (Smith 1894) Weldin 1927 (approved lists 1980), and conservation of the name Salmonella typhi (Schroeter 1886) Warren and Scott 1930 (approved lists 1980) Request for an opinion. International journal of systematic bacteriology 1999 49 Pt 2 927 930 
10 
            Tindall BJ  
            Grimont PA  
            Garrity GM  
             
           Nomenclature and taxonomy of the genus Salmonella International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology 2005 55 Pt 1 521 524 15653930 
11 
            Reeves MW  
            Evins GM  
            Heiba AA  
             
           Clonal nature of Salmonella typhi and its genetic relatedness to other salmonellae as shown by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis, and proposal of Salmonella bongori comb. nov Journal of clinical microbiology 1989 27 2 313 320 2915026 
12 
            Edwards RA  
            Olsen GJ  
            Maloy SR  
           Comparative genomics of closely related salmonellae Trends in microbiology 2002 10 2 94 99 11827811 
13 
            McClelland M  
            Sanderson KE  
            Spieth J  
             
           Complete genome sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 Nature 2001 413 6858 852 856 11677609 
14 
            Parkhill J  
            Dougan G  
            James KD  
             
           Complete genome sequence of a multiple drug resistant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi CT18 Nature 2001 413 6858 848 852 11677608 
15 
            Porwollik S  
            McClelland M  
           Lateral gene transfer in Salmonella Microbes and infection / Institut Pasteur 2003 5 11 977 989 12941390 
16 
            Chiu CH  
            Tang P  
            Chu C  
             
           The genome sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar Choleraesuis, a highly invasive and resistant zoonotic pathogen Nucleic acids research 2005 33 5 1690 1698 15781495 
17 
            Baker S  
            Dougan G  
           The genome of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America 2007 45 Suppl 1 S29 S33 17582565 
18 
            Litrup E  
            Torpdahl M  
            Malorny B  
             
           Association between phylogeny, virulence potential and serovars of Salmonella enterica Infection, genetics and evolution : journal of molecular epidemiology and evolutionary genetics in infectious diseases 2010 10 7 1132 1139 
19 
            Lan R  
            Reeves PR  
            Octavia S  
           Population structure, origins and evolution of major Salmonella enterica clones Infection, genetics and evolution : journal of molecular epidemiology and evolutionary genetics in infectious diseases 2009 9 5 996 1005 
20 
            Jacobsen A  
            Hendriksen RS  
            Aaresturp FM  
             
           The Salmonella enterica pangenome Microbial ecology 2011 62 3 487 504 21643699 
21 
            Grimont PADaW F  
           Antigenic Formulae of the Salmonella Serovars WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Salmonella 2007 9th edition. 1 166 
22 
            Gilligan PH  
            Janda JM  
            Karmali MA  
            Miller MJ  
           Laboratory Diagnosis of Bacterial Diarrhea Cumitech 1992 12A 
23 
            Ethelberg S  
            Olsen KE  
            Gerner-Smidt P  
             
           The significance of the number of submitted samples and patient-related factors for faecal bacterial diagnostics Clinical microbiology and infection : the official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 2007 13 11 1095 1099 
24 
            www.cdc.gov/ncezid/dfwed/pdfs/salmonella-annual-report-2011-508c.pdf 
           
25 
            Bouvet PJ  
            Jeanjean S  
           Evaluation of two colored latex kits, the Wellcolex Colour Salmonella Test and the Wellcolex Colour Shigella Test, for serological grouping of Salmonella and Shigella species Journal of clinical microbiology 1992 30 8 2184 2186 1500531 
26 
            Scientific T  
           Wellcolex Color Salmonella Rapid Latex Agglutination Test. Package Insert Queried on 11/22/2014, Available at: http://www.thermoscientific.com/en/product/wellcolex-color-salmonella-rapid-latex-agglutination-test-kit.html  
27 CLSI M100-S24: Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing; Twenty-Fourth Informational Supplement 2014 M100-S24 
28 
            Gonzalez-Lopez JJ  
            Piedra-Carrasco N  
            Salvador F  
             
           ESBL-Producing Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhi in Traveler Returning from Guatemala to Spain Emerging infectious diseases 2014 20 11 1918 1920 25340972 
29 
            Irfan S  
            Khan E  
            Jabeen K  
             
           Clinical isolates of Salmonella enterica serovar Agona producing NDM-1 metallo-beta-lactamase: First report from Pakistan Journal of clinical microbiology 2014 
30 
            Chiou CS  
            Alam M  
            Kuo JC  
             
           Chromosome-mediated multidrug resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 2014 
31 
            Deng J  
            Fu L  
            Wang R  
             
           Comparison of MALDI-TOF MS, gene sequencing and the Vitek 2 for identification of seventy-three clinical isolates of enteropathogens Journal of thoracic disease 2014 6 5 539 544 24822116 
32 
            Sparbier K  
            Weller U  
            Boogen C  
             
           Rapid detection of Salmonella sp. by means of a combination of selective enrichment broth and MALDI-TOF MS European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 2012 31 5 767 773 
33 
            Martiny D  
            Busson L  
            Wybo I  
             
           Comparison of the Microflex LT and Vitek MS systems for routine identification of bacteria by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry Journal of clinical microbiology 2012 50 4 1313 1325 22322345 
34 
            Gerome P  
            Le Fleche P  
            Blouin Y  
             
           Yersinia pseudotuberculosis ST42 (O:1) Strain Misidentified as Yersinia pestis by Mass Spectrometry Analysis Genome announcements 2014 2 3 
35 
            Pugliese N  
            Circella E  
            Pazzani C  
             
           Validation of a seminested PCR approach for rapid detection of Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Gallinarum Journal of microbiological methods 2011 85 1 22 27 21256889 
36 
            Akiba M  
            Kusumoto M  
            Iwata T  
           Rapid identification of Salmonella enterica serovars, Typhimurium, Choleraesuis, Infantis, Hadar, Enteritidis, Dublin and Gallinarum, by multiplex PCR Journal of microbiological methods 2011 85 1 9 15 21329737 
37 
            Tankouo-Sandjong B  
            Sessitsch A  
            Liebana E  
             
           MLST-v, multilocus sequence typing based on virulence genes, for molecular typing of Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovars Journal of microbiological methods 2007 69 1 23 36 17208323 
38 
            Duan R  
            Liang J  
            Shi G  
             
           Homology analysis of pathogenic Yersinia species Yersinia enterocolitica, Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, and Yersinia pestis based on multilocus sequence typing Journal of clinical microbiology 2014 52 1 20 29 24131695 
39 
            Mallik S  
            Virdi JS  
           Genetic relationships between clinical and non-clinical strains of Yersinia enterocolitica biovar 1A as revealed by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis and multilocus restriction typing BMC microbiology 2010 10 158 20509911 
40 
            Ruekit S  
            Wangchuk S  
            Dorji T  
             
           Molecular characterization and PCR-based replicon typing of multidrug resistant Shigella sonnei isolates from an outbreak in Thimphu, Bhutan BMC research notes 2014 7 95 24555739 
41 
            Voskresenskaya E  
            Savin C  
            Leclercq A  
             
           Typing and clustering of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis isolates by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis using insertion sequences Journal of clinical microbiology 2014 52 6 1978 1989 24671793 
42 
            Wang YW  
            Watanabe H  
            Phung DC  
             
           Multilocus variable-number tandem repeat analysis for molecular typing and phylogenetic analysis of Shigella flexneri BMC microbiology 2009 9 278 20042119 
43 
            Deng X  
            Shariat N  
            Driebe EM  
             
           Comparative analysis of subtyping methods against a whole genome sequencing standard in Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis Journal of clinical microbiology 2014 
44 
            McDonnell J  
            Dallman T  
            Atkin S  
             
           Retrospective analysis of whole genome sequencing compared to prospective typing data in further informing the epidemiological investigation of an outbreak of Shigella sonnei in the UK Epidemiology and infection 2013 141 12 2568 2575 23425681 
45 
            Sangal V  
            Holt KE  
            Yuan J  
             
           Global phylogeny of Shigella sonnei strains from limited single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and development of a rapid and cost-effective SNP-typing scheme for strain identification by high-resolution melting analysis Journal of clinical microbiology 2013 51 1 303 305 23115259 
46 
            Khare R  
            Espy MJ  
            Cebelinski E  
             
           Comparative evaluation of two commercial multiplex panels for detection of gastrointestinal pathogens by use of clinical stool specimens Journal of clinical microbiology 2014 52 10 3667 3673 25100818 
47 
            Anderson NW  
            Buchan BW  
            Ledeboer NA  
           Comparison of the BD MAX enteric bacterial panel to routine culture methods for detection of Campylobacter, enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (O157), Salmonella, and Shigella isolates in preserved stool specimens Journal of clinical microbiology 2014 52 4 1222 1224 24430460 
48 
            Perry MD  
            Corden SA  
            Howe RA  
           Evaluation of the Luminex xTAG Gastrointestinal Pathogen Panel and the Savyon Diagnostics Gastrointestinal Infection Panel for the detection of enteric pathogens in clinical samples Journal of medical microbiology 2014 63 Pt 11 1419 1426 25102908 
49 
            Dunbar SA  
            Ritchie VB  
            Hoffmeyer MR  
             
           Luminex((R)) multiplex bead suspension arrays for the detection and serotyping of Salmonella spp Methods in molecular biology 2015 1225 1 27 25253245 
50 
            Siah SP  
            Merif J  
            Kaur K  
             
           Improved detection of gastrointestinal pathogens using generalised sample processing and amplification panels Pathology 2014 46 1 53 59 24300711 
51 
            Wessels E  
            Rusman LG  
            van Bussel MJ  
             
           Added value of multiplex Luminex Gastrointestinal Pathogen Panel (xTAG(R) GPP) testing in the diagnosis of infectious gastroenteritis Clinical microbiology and infection : the official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 2014 20 3 O182 O187 
52 
            Navidad JF  
            Griswold DJ  
            Gradus MS  
             
           Evaluation of Luminex xTAG gastrointestinal pathogen analyte-specific reagents for high-throughput, simultaneous detection of bacteria, viruses, and parasites of clinical and public health importance Journal of clinical microbiology 2013 51 9 3018 3024 23850948 
53 
            Pierce SE  
            Bell RL  
            Hellberg RS  
             
           Detection and Identification of Salmonella enterica, Escherichia coli, and Shigella spp. via PCR-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: isolate testing and analysis of food samples Applied and environmental microbiology 2012 78 23 8403 8411 23001674 
54 Shigella: CDC website http://wwwcdcgov/shigella/  and http://wwwcdcgov/pulsenet/pathogens/shigellahtml  
55 
            Papasian CJ  
            Enna-Kifer S  
            Garrison B  
           Symptomatic Shigella sonnei urinary tract infection Journal of clinical microbiology 1995 33 8 2222 2223 7559987 
56 
            Appannanavar SB  
            Goyal K  
            Garg R  
             
           Shigellemia in a post renal transplant patient: a case report and literature review Journal of infection in developing countries 2014 8 2 237 239 24518636 
57 
            Markham KB  
            Backes C Jr.  
            Samuels P  
           Bacteremia and intrauterine infection with Shigella sonnei in a pregnant woman with AIDS Archives of gynecology and obstetrics 2012 286 3 799 801 22467150 
58 
            Acheson DWK  
            Keusch GT  
           
            Blaser PDS MJ  
            Ravdin JI  
            Greenberg HB  
            Guerrant RL  
           Shigella and enteroinvasive Escherichia coli Infections of the Gastrointestinal Tract 1995 New York, NY Raven Press 763 784 
59 
            Kotloff KL  
            Winickoff JP  
            Ivanoff B  
             
           Global burden of Shigella infections: implications for vaccine development and implementation of control strategies Bulletin of the World Health Organization 1999 77 8 651 666 10516787 
60 
            Bardhan P  
            Faruque AS  
            Naheed A  
             
           Decrease in shigellosis-related deaths without Shigella spp.-specific interventions, Asia Emerging infectious diseases 2010 16 11 1718 1723 21029529 
61 
            Van de Verg LL  
            Venkatesan MM  
           Editorial commentary: a Shigella vaccine against prevalent serotypes Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America 2014 59 7 942 943 24958237 
62 
            Scallan E  
            Hoekstra RM  
            Angulo FJ  
             
           Foodborne illness acquired in the United States--major pathogens Emerging infectious diseases 2011 17 1 7 15 21192848 
63 
            DuPont HL  
            Levine MM  
            Hornick RB  
             
           Inoculum size in shigellosis and implications for expected mode of transmission The Journal of infectious diseases 1989 159 6 1126 1128 2656880 
64 Shigella sonnei outbreak among men who have sex with men--San Francisco, California, 2000–2001 MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report 2001 50 42 922 926 11699845 
65 Day care-related outbreaks of rhamnose-negative Shigella sonnei--six states, June 2001–March 2003 MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report 2004 53 3 60 63 14749615 
66 Outbreaks of multidrug-resistant Shigella sonnei gastroenteritis associated with day care centers--Kansas, Kentucky, and Missouri, 2005 MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report 2006 55 39 1068 1071 17021592 
67 
            Arvelo W  
            Hinkle CJ  
            Nguyen TA  
             
           Transmission risk factors and treatment of pediatric shigellosis during a large daycare center-associated outbreak of multidrug resistant Shigella sonnei: implications for the management of shigellosis outbreaks among children The Pediatric infectious disease journal 2009 28 11 976 980 19738503 
68 
            Daskalakis DC  
            Blaser MJ  
           Another perfect storm: Shigella, men who have sex with men, and HIV Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America 2007 44 3 335 337 17205437 
69 
            Khan WA  
            Griffiths JK  
            Bennish ML  
           Gastrointestinal and extra-intestinal manifestations of childhood shigellosis in a region where all four species of Shigella are endemic PloS one 2013 8 5 e64097 23691156 
70 
            Tauxe RV  
            Puhr ND  
            Wells JG  
             
           Antimicrobial resistance of Shigella isolates in the USA: the importance of international travelers The Journal of infectious diseases 1990 162 5 1107 1111 2230237 
71 
            von Seidlein L  
            Kim DR  
            Ali M  
             
           A multicentre study of Shigella diarrhoea in six Asian countries: disease burden, clinical manifestations, and microbiology PLoS medicine 2006 3 9 e353 16968124 
72 
            van den Beld MJ  
            Reubsaet FA  
           Differentiation between Shigella, enteroinvasive Escherichia coli (EIEC) and noninvasive Escherichia coli European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 2012 31 6 899 904 
73 
            Huys G  
            Cnockaert M  
            Janda JM  
             
           Escherichia albertii sp. nov., a diarrhoeagenic species isolated from stool specimens of Bangladeshi children International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology 2003 53 Pt 3 807 810 12807204 
74 
            Hyma KE  
            Lacher DW  
            Nelson AM  
             
           Evolutionary genetics of a new pathogenic Escherichia species: Escherichia albertii and related Shigella boydii strains Journal of bacteriology 2005 187 2 619 628 15629933 
75 
            Winn WC Jr.  
            Allen SD  
            Janda WM  
            Koneman EW  
            Procop GW  
            Schreckenberger PC  
            Woods GL  
           The Enterobacteriacae Koneman's Color Atlas and Textbook of Diagnostic Microbiology 2006 6th ed. Baltimore, MD Lippincott, Williams, &amp; Wilkins 211 302 
76 
            Lindberg AA  
            Karnell A  
            Weintraub A  
           The lipopolysaccharide of Shigella bacteria as a virulence factor Reviews of infectious diseases 1991 13 Suppl 4 S279 S284 1710816 
77 
            Porter CK  
            Thura N  
            Ranallo RT  
             
           The Shigella human challenge model Epidemiology and infection 2013 141 2 223 232 22906296 
78 
            Campilongo R  
            Di Martino ML  
            Marcocci L  
             
           Molecular and functional profiling of the polyamine content in enteroinvasive E. coli : looking into the gap between commensal E. coli and harmful Shigella PloS one 2014 9 9 e106589 25192335 
79 
            Carroll KC  
            Borek AP  
            Burger C  
             
           Evaluation of the BD Phoenix automated microbiology system for identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of staphylococci and enterococci Journal of clinical microbiology 2006 44 6 2072 2077 16757600 
80 
            Aldridge KE  
            Gardner BB  
            Clark SJ  
             
           Comparison of micro-ID, API 20E, and conventional media systems in identification of Enterobacteriaceae Journal of clinical microbiology 1978 7 6 507 513 353065 
81 
            O'Hara CM  
            Rhoden DL  
            Miller JM  
           Reevaluation of the API 20E identification system versus conventional biochemicals for identification of members of the family Enterobacteriaceae: a new look at an old product Journal of clinical microbiology 1992 30 1 123 125 1734043 
82 
            Peele D  
            Bradfield J  
            Pryor W  
             
           Comparison of identifications of human and animal source gram-negative bacteria by API 20E and crystal E/NF systems Journal of clinical microbiology 1997 35 1 213 216 8968910 
83 
            Robinson A  
            McCarter YS  
            Tetreault J  
           Comparison of Crystal Enteric/Nonfermenter system, API 20E system, and Vitek AutoMicrobic system for identification of gram-negative bacilli Journal of clinical microbiology 1995 33 2 364 370 7714193 
84 
            Khot PD  
            Fisher MA  
           Novel approach for differentiating Shigella species and Escherichia coli by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry Journal of clinical microbiology 2013 51 11 3711 3716 23985919 
85 
            Gould LH  
            Bopp C  
            Strockbine N  
             
           Recommendations for diagnosis of shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli infections by clinical laboratories MMWR Recommendations and reports : Morbidity and mortality weekly report Recommendations and reports / Centers for Disease Control 2009 58 RR-12 1 14 19834454 
86 
            Gavin PJ  
            Peterson LR  
            Pasquariello AC  
             
           Evaluation of performance and potential clinical impact of ProSpecT Shiga toxin Escherichia coli microplate assay for detection of Shiga Toxin-producing E. coli in stool samples Journal of clinical microbiology 2004 42 4 1652 1656 15071021 
87 
            Mackenzie AM  
            Lebel P  
            Orrbine E  
             
           Sensitivities and specificities of premier E. coli O157 and premier EHEC enzyme immunoassays for diagnosis of infection with verotxin (Shiga-like toxin)-producing Escherichia coli. The SYNSORB Pk Study investigators Journal of clinical microbiology 1998 36 6 1608 1611 9620386 
88 
            He X  
            Patfield S  
            Hnasko R  
             
           A polyclonal antibody based immunoassay detects seven subtypes of Shiga toxin 2 produced by Escherichia coli in human and environmental samples PloS one 2013 8 10 e76368 24146860 
89 
            Urdahl AM  
            Solheim HT  
            Vold L  
             
           Shiga toxin-encoding genes (stx genes) in human faecal samples APMIS : acta pathologica, microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica 2013 121 3 202 210 
90 
            Ashkenazi S  
            Levy I  
            Kazaronovski V  
             
           Growing antimicrobial resistance of Shigella isolates The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 2003 51 2 427 429 12562716 
91 
            Khatun F  
            Faruque AS  
            Koeck JL  
             
           Changing species distribution and antimicrobial susceptibility pattern of Shigella over a 29-year period (1980–2008) Epidemiology and infection 2011 139 3 446 452 20478088 
92 
            Taneja N  
            Mewara A  
            Kumar A  
             
           Cephalosporin-resistant Shigella flexneri over 9 years (2001-09) in India The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 2012 67 6 1347 1353 22410619 
93 
            Vinh H  
            Nhu NT  
            Nga TV  
             
           A changing picture of shigellosis in southern Vietnam: shifting species dominance, antimicrobial susceptibility and clinical presentation BMC infectious diseases 2009 9 204 20003464 
94 
            Zhang W  
            Luo Y  
            Li J  
             
           Wide dissemination of multidrug-resistant Shigella isolates in China The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 2011 66 11 2527 2535 21859815 
95 
            Ghosh S  
            Pazhani GP  
            Chowdhury G  
             
           Genetic characteristics and changing antimicrobial resistance among Shigella spp. isolated from hospitalized diarrhoeal patients in Kolkata, India Journal of medical microbiology 2011 60 Pt 10 1460 1466 21659504 
96 
            Jain S  
            Sharma M  
            Gupta R  
             
           Multidrug resistant Shigella flexneri : a rare case of septicemia in an infant Journal of clinical and diagnostic research : JCDR 2014 8 6 DD03 DD04 25120984 
97 
            Azmi IJ  
            Khajanchi BK  
            Akter F  
             
           Fluoroquinolone resistance mechanisms of Shigella flexneri isolated in Bangladesh PloS one 2014 9 7 e102533 25028972 
98 
            Phalipon A  
            Sansonetti PJ  
           Shigella's ways of manipulating the host intestinal innate and adaptive immune system: a tool box for survival? Immunology and cell biology 2007 85 2 119 129 17213832 
99 
            Schroeder GN  
            Hilbi H  
           Molecular pathogenesis of Shigella spp.: controlling host cell signaling, invasion, and death by type III secretion Clinical microbiology reviews 2008 21 1 134 156 18202440 
100 
            Ogawa M  
            Handa Y  
            Ashida H  
             
           The versatility of Shigella effectors Nature reviews Microbiology 2008 6 1 11 16 
101 
            Barry EM  
            Pasetti MF  
            Sztein MB  
             
           Progress and pitfalls in Shigella vaccine research Nature reviews Gastroenterology &amp; hepatology 2013 10 4 245 255 
102 
            Herold S  
            Karch H  
            Schmidt H  
           Shiga toxin-encoding bacteriophages--genomes in motion International journal of medical microbiology : IJMM 2004 294 2–3 115 121 15493821 
103 
            Donohue-Rolfe A  
            Acheson DW  
            Keusch GT  
           Shiga toxin: purification, structure, and function Reviews of infectious diseases 1991 13 Suppl 4 S293 S297 2047652 
104 
            Kim YJ  
            Yeo SG  
            Park JH  
             
           Shigella vaccine development: prospective animal models and current status Current pharmaceutical biotechnology 2013 14 10 903 912 24372251 
105 
            Bottone EJ  
           Yersinia enterocolitica: the charisma continues Clinical microbiology reviews 1997 10 2 257 276 9105754 
106 Yersinia: CDC Website 
            http://wwwcdcgov/nczved/divisions/dfbmd/diseases/yersinia/ 
           
107 
            Cover TL  
            Aber RC  
           Yersinia enterocolitica The New England journal of medicine 1989 321 1 16 24 2659991 
108 
            Foberg U  
            Fryden A  
            Kihlstrom E  
             
           Yersinia enterocolitica septicemia: clinical and microbiological aspects Scandinavian journal of infectious diseases 1986 18 4 269 279 3532302 
109 
            Giamarellou H  
            Antoniadou A  
            Kanavos K  
             
           Yersinia enterocolitica endocarditis: case report and literature review European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 1995 14 2 126 130 
110 
            van der Heijden IM  
            Res PC  
            Wilbrink B  
             
           Yersinia enterocolitica: a cause of chronic polyarthritis Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America 1997 25 4 831 837 9356797 
111 
            Adamkiewicz TV  
            Berkovitch M  
            Krishnan C  
             
           Infection due to Yersinia enterocolitica in a series of patients with beta-thalassemia: incidence and predisposing factors Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America 1998 27 6 1362 1366 9868642 
112 Yersinia enterocolitica gastroenteritis among infants exposed to chitterlings--Chicago, Illinois, 2002 MMWR Morbidity and mortality weekly report 2003 52 40 956 958 14534510 
113 
            Abdel-Haq NM  
            Asmar BI  
            Abuhammour WM  
             
           Yersinia enterocolitica infection in children The Pediatric infectious disease journal 2000 19 10 954 958 11055595 
114 
            Fredriksson-Ahomaa M  
            Stolle A  
            Korkeala H  
           Molecular epidemiology of Yersinia enterocolitica infections FEMS immunology and medical microbiology 2006 47 3 315 329 16872368 
115 
            Jones TF  
           From pig to pacifier: chitterling-associated yersiniosis outbreak among black infants Emerging infectious diseases 2003 9 8 1007 1009 12967503 
116 
            Lee LA  
            Gerber AR  
            Lonsway DR  
             
           Yersinia enterocolitica O:3 infections in infants and children, associated with the household preparation of chitterlings The New England journal of medicine 1990 322 14 984 987 2314448 
117 
            Lee LA  
            Taylor J  
            Carter GP  
             
           Yersinia enterocolitica O:3: an emerging cause of pediatric gastroenteritis in the United States. The Yersinia enterocolitica Collaborative Study Group The Journal of infectious diseases 1991 163 3 660 663 1995741 
118 
            Wagner SJ  
            Friedman LI  
            Dodd RY  
           Transfusion-associated bacterial sepsis Clinical microbiology reviews 1994 7 3 290 302 7923050 
119 
            Tertti R  
            Vuento R  
            Mikkola P  
             
           Clinical manifestations of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis infection in children European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 1989 8 7 587 591 
120 
            Crchova V  
            Grondin C  
           [Urinary infection due to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis] La Vie medicale au Canada francais 1973 2 1 3 5 4711744 
121 
            Ljungberg P  
            Valtonen M  
            Harjola VP  
             
           Report of four cases of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis septicemia and a literature review European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 1995 14 9 804 810 
122 
            Naiel B  
            Raul R  
           Chronic prostatitis due to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis Journal of clinical microbiology 1998 36 3 856 9508336 
123 
            Nuorti JP  
            Niskanen T  
            Hallanvuo S  
             
           A widespread outbreak of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis O:3 infection from iceberg lettuce The Journal of infectious diseases 2004 189 5 766 774 14976592 
124 
            Jalava K  
            Hakkinen M  
            Valkonen M  
             
           An outbreak of gastrointestinal illness and erythema nodosum from grated carrots contaminated with Yersinia pseudotuberculosis The Journal of infectious diseases 2006 194 9 1209 1216 17041846 
125 
            Reuter S  
            Connor TR  
            Barquist L  
             
           Parallel independent evolution of pathogenicity within the genus Yersinia Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2014 111 18 6768 6773 24753568 
126 
            Archer JR  
            Schell RF  
            Pennell DR  
             
           Identification of Yersinia spp. with the API 20E system Journal of clinical microbiology 1987 25 12 2398 2399 3323231 
127 
            Sharma NK  
            Doyle PW  
            Gerbasi SA  
             
           Identification of Yersinia species by the API 20E Journal of clinical microbiology 1990 28 6 1443 1444 2199507 
128 
            Wunderink HF  
            Oostvogel PM  
            Frenay IH  
             
           Difficulties in diagnosing terminal ileitis due to Yersinia pseudotuberculosis European journal of clinical microbiology &amp; infectious diseases : official publication of the European Society of Clinical Microbiology 2014 33 2 197 200 
129 
            Singhal N  
            Kumar M  
            Virdi JS  
           Molecular analysis of beta-lactamase genes to understand their differential expression in strains of Yersinia enterocolitica biotype 1A Scientific reports 2014 4 5270 24920253 
130 
            Batzilla J  
            Heesemann J  
            Rakin A  
           The pathogenic potential of Yersinia enterocolitica 1A International journal of medical microbiology : IJMM 2011 301 7 556 561 21798805 
131 
            Rakin A  
            Schneider L  
            Podladchikova O  
           Hunger for iron: the alternative siderophore iron scavenging systems in highly virulent Yersinia Frontiers in cellular and infection microbiology 2012 2 151 23226687 
132 
            Capilla S  
            Ruiz J  
            Goni P  
             
           Characterization of the molecular mechanisms of quinolone resistance in Yersinia enterocolitica O:3 clinical isolates The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 2004 53 6 1068 1071 15117921 
133 
            Pham JN  
            Bell SM  
            Martin L  
             
           The beta-lactamases and beta-lactam antibiotic susceptibility of Yersinia enterocolitica The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy 2000 46 6 951 957 11102414 
134 
            Porter CK  
            Choi D  
            Cash B  
             
           Pathogen-specific risk of chronic gastrointestinal disorders following bacterial causes of foodborne illness BMC gastroenterology 2013 13 46 23510245 
135 
            Dizdar V  
            Gilja OH  
            Hausken T  
           Increased visceral sensitivity in Giardia-induced postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia. Effect of the 5HT3-antagonist ondansetron Neurogastroenterology and motility : the official journal of the European Gastrointestinal Motility Society 2007 19 12 977 982 17973637 
136 
            Falth-Magnusson K  
            Franzen L  
            Jansson G  
             
           Infant feeding history shows distinct differences between Swedish celiac and reference children Pediatric allergy and immunology : official publication of the European Society of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology 1996 7 1 1 5 8792377 
137 
            Verdu EF  
            Mauro M  
            Bourgeois J  
             
           Clinical onset of celiac disease after an episode of Campylobacter jejuni enteritis Canadian journal of gastroenterology = Journal canadien de gastroenterologie 2007 21 7 453 455 17637949 

