LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10096373932620Heart Lung CircHeart Lung CircHeart, lung &amp; circulation1443-95061444-289224954709424117910.1016/j.hlc.2014.04.130NIHMS607269ArticleUse of Pressure-volume Conductance Catheters in Real-time Cardiovascular Experimentation Wei Abraham E. 1Maslov Mikhail Y. 1*Pezone Matthew J. 1Edelman Elazer R. 2Lovich Mark A. 11 Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Steward St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center/Tufts University School of Medicine, 736 Cambridge street, CBR 412, Boston, MA, 02135, USA2 Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Building E25-438, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA* Corresponding author: Address: 736 Cambridge st, CBR 412, Boston, MA, 02135, USA, mikhail.maslov@steward.org, Phone: 617-789-5017, Fax: 617-254-638425 6 2014 22 5 2014 11 2014 01 11 2015 23 11 1059 1069 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Background
Most applications of pressure-volume conductance catheter measurements assess cardiovascular function at a single point in time after genetic, pharmacologic, infectious, nutritional, or toxicologic manipulation. Use of these catheters as a continuous monitor, however, is fraught with complexities and limitations.

Methods
Examples of the limitations and optimal use of conductance catheters as a continuous, real-time monitor of cardiovascular function are demonstrated during inotropic drug infusion in anesthetised rats.

Results
Inotropic drug infusion may alter ventricular dimensions causing relative movement of a well-positioned catheter, generating artifacts, including an abrupt pressure rise at end-systole that leads to over estimation of indices of contractility (max dP/dt) and loss of stroke volume signal. Simple rotation of the catheter, echocardiography-guided placement to the centre of the ventricle, or ventricular expansion through crystalloid infusion may correct for these artifacts. Fluid administration, however, alters left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and volume and therefore stroke volume, thereby obscuring continuous real-time haemodynamic measurements.

Conclusions
Pressure-volume artifacts during inotropic infusion are caused by physical contact of the catheter with endocardium. Repeated correction of catheter position may be required to use pressure volume catheters as a continuous real-time monitor during manipulations that alter ventricular dimensions, such as inotropic therapy.

Pressure-volume conductance catheterPressure volume loopDobutamine infusionMax dP/dtEnd-systolic pressure volume relationship
   INTRODUCTION
Measurement of left ventricular pressure and volume is a valuable means for characterising cardiac function [1, 2, 3]. From these measurements and their derivatives, parameters of left ventricle (LV) function and energetics such as stroke volume (SV), stroke work (SW), ejection fraction, pre-load recruitable stroke work, arterial elastance, end-systolic pressure-volume relationship (ESPVR), maximum dP/dt, minimum dP/dt, and relaxation time constants can be obtained. In 1984, Baan and colleagues designed a conductance catheter that could acquire simultaneous pressure-volume (PV) measurements continuously in large animals [4]. This catheter eliminated the need for careful synchronisation of left ventricular manometric pressure readings with volume measurements from labour intensive, costly imaging methods like echocardiography, sonomicrometry, or MRI. A miniature PV catheter for mice was introduced in 1998 [5] and has been used to elucidate the haemodynamic implications of many rodent models of cardiovascular disease [6, 7, 8, 9].

The PV catheter passes a high-frequency low-amplitude current through two sets of electrodes that are ideally oriented along the longitudinal axis of the LV and simultaneously measures electrical potentials that are proportional to ventricular volume. With calibration, these signals can be converted to instantaneous LV blood volume measurements. Also integrated into the catheter is a pressure transducer allowing real time pressure-volume loop generation. While the PV catheter is easier to use and more direct than many cardiac imaging techniques, optimal position and orientation of the catheter in the ventricle at various haemodynamic states must be maintained for accurate measurements. Pacher and colleagues described a comprehensive guide for using this technology [1, 3]. They recommended that the PV catheter be adjusted and optimised prior to recording data, ensuring capture of the maximum LV blood volume signals.

Many applications of PV catheters assess cardiovascular function at a single point in time after genetic, pharmacologic, toxicologic, infectious, environmental or nutritional manipulation of an animal, and these data are compared to control animals without such interventions. These applications require delineation of steady state conditions before and after treatment or intervention, but neglect the time course of the transition. PV conductance catheters can be used as a continuous real-time monitor of cardiovascular function but such use is more complicated and somewhat more limited than at specific points in time. Continuous experiments are often pharmacologic interventions that produce acute haemodynamic changes, on the order of minutes to hours, and can be performed while the PV catheter remains in situ for the duration of the treatment [10, 11]. We have found that such real-time monitoring during pharmacologic treatment can only be performed with frequent manipulation to optimise position, which can lead to disruptions in continuous signals. Some have presented real-time data from PV catheters [12, 13], but make no mention of the need for periodic catheter placement optimisation.

We demonstrate the limitations of continuous pressure and volume monitoring with PV catheters and methods to overcome them in a model of inotropic drug infusion, dobutamine. This beta adrenergic agonist increases SV and cardiac output through a beta-1 adrenergic mediated positive inotropic response on myocardium and beta-2 adrenergic mediated peripheral arterial and venous dilatation [14]. Dobutamine, therefore, increases contractility while, at the same time, decreases preload and afterload, a combination of effects that tends to decrease the volume of the ventricle. This drug also has the pharmacokinetic advantage of a short serum half-life of three minutes so that haemodynamics changes reach steady-state within 10 minutes of starting an infusion. Real-time continuous catheter measurements can accurately capture swift changes in the pharmacodynamic profile of dobutamine infusion. Our study suggests measures to be taken for optimal use of this technique as a real-time monitor. Researchers performing experimental interventions eliciting similar dynamic cardiovascular responses can benefit from this method of catheter use.

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
Rodent Preparation and Catheterization
All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Steward St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center. Male Sprague-Dawley rats (400–450 grams; Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were anaesthetised with pentobarbital (50 mg/kg, intraperitoneal, i.p.), weighed, and an intraperitoneal catheter was placed for continuous infusion of pentobarbital (30 mg/kg/hr). The neck, chest and inguinal areas were shaved and the animal placed supine on a heating pad (#TP-500; Gaymar Industries, Orchard Park, NY) set to maintain rectal temperatures between 36.7–37.0°C. A tracheotomy was performed with a 14-gauge cannula secured and connected to a custom ventilator system which delivered 153 mL/min O2 through a solenoid valve controlled by a computer (Labview Express 7.0; National Instruments, Austin, TX) at a respiratory rate of 96 breaths per minute, an I:E ratio of 1:3, and an approximate tidal volume of 1.6 mL.

The right femoral artery and internal jugular vein were exposed and cannulated with polyethylene-50 (PE-50) tubing. Both cannulas were de-aired with heparinised saline (2 U/mL) and joined together by a single stopcock connected to a pressure transducer (#TRN050; Kent Scientific, Torrington, CT). Toggling the stopcock allowed acquisition of either the arterial or central venous pressures. A pressure-volume conductance catheter (#SPR-869; Millar Instruments, Houston, TX) was inserted via an arteriotomy in the right carotid artery and advanced retrograde across the aortic valve and into the left ventricle. The right femoral vein was cannulated with PE-50 tubing, and albumin (#A7906, 10% in normal saline; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) delivered through it at 0.25 mL increments until left ventricular PV loops showed the four distinct phases of the cardiac cycle. The sternum was removed through bilateral, anterolateral, vertical thoracotomies and a loop of suture was wrapped around the inferior vena cava (IVC). Preload on the heart was transiently decreased by pulling up on the suture over 7–10 heart beats to obstruct IVC blood flow.

Data Acquisition
Arterial and venous pressures were transduced to a signal amplifier (#TRN005; Kent Scientific, Torrington, CT), digitised (PowerLab/8SP; ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO) and recorded in LabChart software (version 7.3.3; ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO). Signals from the pressure-volume conductance catheter (MPVS-300 system; Millar Instruments, Houston, Texas) were similarly digitised and stored. At the end of each experiment, blood was collected and added to cuvettes of known dimensions (#910-1048; Millar Instruments, Houston, Texas). The conductance of blood in each cuvette was measured for calibration of ventricular volume.

Catheter Position in Drug Infusion
A drug infusion by syringe pump (#74900-00; Cole Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL) was connected to the internal jugular vein cannula via a stopcock which was toggled transiently between central venous pressure monitoring and drug infusion. After catheterisation and thoracotomy, the animal was allowed to stabilise for 15 minutes prior to starting dobutamine infusion (5 μg/kg/min I.V., 0.2mL/hr).

Prior to drug treatment, the position of the catheter was carefully adjusted until the SV signal was maximised and the PV loop showed four distinct phases corresponding to filling, isovolumetric contraction, ejection, and isovolumetric relaxation. This was done by twisting the catheter while simultaneously advancing into or withdrawing from the LV. Once steady-state drug effects have been reached, the catheter position was adjusted again in a similar manner to ensure optimal PV loop morphology and maximal SV.

Regression based measurements of heart function require transient reduction in preload [15]. For these measurements, the ligature around the IVC was transiently tightened to reduce preload on the LV. This allows regression-based analyses such as the ESPVR, preload recruitable stroke work, and arterial elastance [1, 3] (PVAN Ultra 1.1; Millar Instruments, Houston, Texas).

Echocardiography measurements
Transthoracic echocardiograms were taken during drug treatment. An HP Sonos 5500 echocardiogram unit (Agilent Technologies, Andover, MA) was utilised. Echocardiograms were acquired by using a pediatric neonatal transducer set with the acquisition frame rate of 89 Hz (Model#21380A S12 5–12 MHz Probe, Agilent Technologies). The LV short axis view was used to visualise the axial placement of the catheter in the mid-section of the LV.

RESULTS
PV-loop Morphologic Change by Catheter Manipulation
Intravenous infusion of dobutamine predictably increased SV (Fig. 1A). Approximately 15 minutes after the start of drug delivery, full drug effect was achieved as indicated by a plateau in heart rate (HR), SV and systemic vascular resistance (SVR) tracings. Whereas the morphology of the PV loop initially showed four distinct phases of the cardiac cycle (Fig. 1B), the steady state PV loop showed a loss of ventricular pressure during mid-systolic ejection with an increase towards the end of systole (Fig. 1C). After manipulation of the catheter during steady state peak drug effect, the PV loop returned closer to its expected four-phase morphology and SV increased (Fig. 1D).

Post-treatment Rise in Ventricular End Systolic Pressure and its Effect on Pressure-derived Measurements
In another experiment, prior to dobutamine infusion the pressure during systolic ejection was constant (Fig. 2B). As the infusion progressed and changes in heart loading and inotropy moved the catheter relative to the heart wall, a late systolic ejection pressure peak formed (Fig. 2C). The arterial pressures, however, did not change, thus indicating an apparent new pressure gradient between ventricle and artery (Fig. 2A). Simple rotation of the catheter - up to 180° in either direction restored near normal PV loop morphology (Fig. 2D).

Echocardiographic imaging showed that the catheter had moved adjacent to a papillary muscle during dobutamine infusion. Echocardiographic video showed the displaced catheter pressure transducer being pushed by moving endocardium during systole (Supplemental Video 1). Corresponding PV loops revealed a sharp rise in end-systolic pressure (Fig. 3A). After the catheter position was manually centred in the ventricle, the transducer no longer contacted endocardium (Supplemental Video 2) and the PV loops were restored to normal four phase morphology (Fig. 3B).

The maximum in dP/dt signal normally occurs near the beginning of isovolemic contraction (Fig. 4A). Under conditions where the PV loop shows an end-systolic pressure peak, such as with inotropic drug infusion, two distinct peaks are seen in the dP/dt tracing during each cardiac cycle (Fig. 4B). Pressure at end-systole (Pes), stroke work (SW) and max dP/dt measured without eliminating the end systolic pressure (ESP) rise artifact with catheter manipulation are all overestimates (Table 1). Simple rotation of the catheter eliminated the bi-phasic artifact in dP/dt signal (Fig. 4C) and restored these indices of LV function to their correct levels. Inspection of the PV loops before and after repositioning the catheter showed that SW, which represents the energy exerted by the ventricle to eject a volume of blood into the aorta and calculated as the area inside the loop, is overestimated when the end-systolic pressure rise artifact is present. SW, in the example shown (Table 1, and Fig. 4B), is 65% greater than the actual SW calculated after catheter position correction.

Regression-based Contractility Measurements
PV loops with normal four-phase morphology responded to IVC occlusion with a steady decrease of end-systolic pressure and volume to give a measureable ESPVR (Fig. 5A). However, an ESP rise artifact forming in the middle of an IVC occlusion yielded artifactually high end-systolic pressures which disrupted the linearity of the ESPVR measurements (Fig. 5B). In another experiment, infusion of crystalloid prior to IVC occlusion improved the morphology of PV loops generated for regression analyses (Fig. 6). PV loops before saline bolus showed decreasing LV systolic pressures but only negligible changes in end diastolic or end systolic volumes during IVC occlusion (Fig. 6A). Since the volume at end systole did not fall with decreasing preload by IVC occlusion, the measured ESPVR is near infinite. After addition of 1 mL of saline, the baseline end diastolic volume is increased. End systolic volumes shifted to the left with IVC occlusion, allowing calculation of the linear ESPVR (Fig. 6B). While intravascular resuscitation may facilitate measurement of ESPVR in one-time measurements, it also perturbed other haemodynamic parameters (Fig. 6C and Fig. 6D). In this example, the saline bolus (1 mL) increased SV, arterial pressure, and max dP/dt for more than 15 minutes (Fig. 6D).

DISCUSSION
PV conductance catheters are generally used as a convenient and reliable tool to assess cardiovascular function in vivo. When data are acquired at a single point in time after an experimental manipulation of an animal, this technology is simple to use. However, use of the PV catheters continuously in real-time is more complicated. We demonstrated some of their limitations and techniques to overcome these problems.

Correcting for Catheter Migration During Continuous Treatment and Measurements
Dobutamine infusion produced expected inotropic, chronotropic and vascular effects which reached steady state in approximately 15 minutes after the start of drug delivery (Fig. 1A). In this case, as in many previous experiments we have observed, the four distinct phases of the cardiac cycle seen prior to treatment were altered during drug infusion, with a loss of ventricular pressure during mid-systolic ejection and an increase toward end-systole (Fig. 1C). This suggests that the position of the catheter had changed relative to the walls of the ventricle. The catheter is most likely abutting the endocardium of the ventricular wall or papillary muscle. The migration of the catheter is predictable during infusion of beta-1 agonist drug as the preload is decreased and the contractility increased - two effects that decreased both end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes - and potentially moved the walls of the heart closer to the catheter. Manipulation of the catheter returned the PV loop to its expected four-phase morphology and increased measured SV (Fig. 1D). This corrected morphology suggests that the measured SV prior to catheter adjustment was grossly underestimated.

Others have noted that contact of the catheter with endocardium or mechanical deformation during the cardiac cycle can lead to sharp changes in impedance and erroneous volume signals [22, 23]. These observations preceded the advent of miniaturised, ultrafast pressure transducers and, therefore, the impact on pressure-volume loops was not demonstrated. After the introduction of pressure-volume conductance catheters, some have hypothesised that pressure signals can be artifactually inflated from the catheter striking the endocardium (“shock”) [24] and others recommended optimisation of the PV catheter position prior to a single-time analysis of the contractile state [1, 3]. These significant recommendations are applicable for the many studies of cardiac contractility that follow genetic, pharmacologic, toxicologic, infectious, environmental or nutritional manipulation of an animal. The example of inotropic drug infusion with simultaneous acquisition of pressure-volume and two-dimensional ultrasound data strongly supports the need for optimal catheter position (Fig. 3) and, most importantly, demonstrates the need to repeatedly adjust the catheter placement when used as a real-time monitor. Treatments altering haemodynamic function and ventricle geometry are likely to change the position of the PV catheter relative to the ventricular wall or papillary muscles. Whereas, initially, the conductance electrodes were centred along the axis of the ventricle, after inotropic drug infusion, the electrodes may be located closer to the myocardium where they might capture artifactual volume and pressure signals (Fig. 3). In addition, with the decrease in ventricular size driven by inotropic drug infusion, the catheter may move slightly out of the ventricle. Our data show that the ventricular volumes after drug infusion, but prior to catheter adjustment, were overestimated much more so at end systole than end diastole so that the measured SV is artifactually low (Fig. 1C and Fig. 1D). Therefore, reliable measurements require periodic adjustment of the catheter position.

Optimising Pressure-derived Measurements After Obtaining End Systolic Pressure Rise Artifact
Accurate pressure measurements are also dependent on catheter position. Several studies with PV conductance catheters have demonstrated a rise in ventricular pressure late in systolic ejection [4, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] and some have interpreted this morphology as an increase in SW, calculated as the area inside the PV loop [19, 20]. We replicated this end systolic pressure rise in our experiment (Fig. 2C) and found that the arterial pressures did not change, thus indicating an apparent new pressure gradient between ventricle and artery (Fig. 2A). This gradient is unlikely to acutely arise from the aortic valve. More likely, the rise in LV pressure late in systole was an intraventricular gradient or artifact. Restoration of normal PV loop morphology (Fig. 2D) after catheter manipulation demonstrated that the former pressure peak late in systolic ejection, seen in this example (Fig. 2B) and in prior studies, was in fact an artifact with no real intraventricular gradient.

Echocardiographic studies reveal that the mechanism of this pressure artifact is the pressure sensing orifice of the catheter approaching the endocardium or papillary muscle in a high pressure zone along the walls of the ventricle (Fig. 3). It is probably facilitated by geometric changes of the heart during inotropic treatment. The catheter pressure transducer has shifted position to be adjacent to the endocardium (Fig. 3A). Therefore, ventricular contraction and associated decrease in ventricular volume would result in endocardium contacting tissue and generating a high-pressure field on the transducer during systole. This is observed in echocardiographic video (Supplemental Video 1) and is evidenced by a sharp rise in end-systolic pressure in PV loops (Fig 3A). Twisting the catheter 180 degrees eliminated this pressure rise artifact (Fig. 3B). This manipulation moved the pressure sensing orifice away from the endocardium.

This end systolic pressure rise artifact may have led some researchers to overestimate the SW and the slope of the pressure-volume relationship (Emax) [24]. Furthermore, this artifact (Fig. 4) can also generate inaccurate contractility - max dP/dt - measurements (Table 1). While the maximum rate of change in ventricular pressure normally occurs at the beginning of isovolumetric contraction (Fig. 4A), the ESP rise artifact generated by dobutamine infusion (Fig. 4B) may yield a second peak in dP/dt signal whose maximum is higher than the peak corresponding to isovolumetric contraction. Automated algorithms that examine the maximum of dP/dt will report the higher of these two peaks and, in some cases, it will be from the ESP rise artifact. This artifact needs to be eliminated during experimentation by catheter repositioning (Fig. 4C). Alternatively, one could not use such an automated algorithm and only examine the peak of the dP/dt signal derived during the isovolumetric contraction phase of the PV loops and discard the peak during systolic ejection. Therefore, accurate max dP/dt may need to be manually verified. PV catheter users need to be cognisant that this pressure artifact can develop and the effects it can have on measured indices.

While these data attribute ESP artifact to contact of the catheter with the endocardium that can be easily eliminated, there are certain pathophysiological conditions that can also lead to legitimate, non-artifactual rises in ESP from reflected pressure waves [25, 26]. In particular, ESP rise has been associated with advanced age [27], shorter body length [28], and pathophysiologic conditions with increased arterial stiffness [29].

Regression-based Contractility Measurements
The ESPVR from a series of PV loops generated by an IVC occlusion is commonly used as a load-independent index of contractility [15] (Fig. 5A). An artifactual rise in ESP shown in our study can disrupt IVC occlusion-derived haemodynamic measurements due to an induced non-linearity in the pressure volume relationship (Fig. 5B). Since an IVC occlusion will transiently shrink the size of the ventricle, the pressure transducer on the catheter has an increased chance of striking the endocardium and producing an ESP rise artifact. This problem may be alleviated by reorienting the catheter so the pressure sensor is away from endocardium, or by expanding intravascular volume to enlarge the interior dimensions of the heart prior to IVC occlusion.

Under some conditions, a progressive decrease in LV systolic pressure without change in the end systolic volume during IVC occlusion (Fig. 6A) yields infinite ESPVR. Crystalloid infusion prior to IVC occlusion, as recommended by several investigators [1, 3, 4], increased both end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes, improved the morphology of PV loops generated, and allowed calculation of the ESPVR (Fig. 6B). Unfortunately, intravascular crystalloid administration affected other haemodynamic parameters (Fig. 6D), in some cases for more than 15 minutes, disrupting real-time haemodynamic measurements. Maintaining intravascular volume before and during experimentation will help minimise this limitation; however, the transient hypotension caused by IVC occlusion can illicit several reflexes that can disturb continuous measurement of haemodynamic indices. Therefore, regression analyses from IVC occlusions, while comprehensive and less sensitive to heart loading conditions, may not be compatible with continuous or ongoing measurements.

In conclusion, methods for optimising the use of PV catheters for continuous monitoring in small rodents have been described. Preventions and corrections for errant volume and pressure measurements will ensure optimal haemodynamic measurements. Awareness of these issues and procedures will shorten the learning curve for using the PV conductance catheter technology and may have implications on experimental results.

Supplementary Material
01  02  This study was supported by the American Heart Association (09SDG2060320) to Mark A. Lovich, the Society for Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Starter Grant to Mark A. Lovich, the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Steward St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center, Brighton, MA, NIH R01 GM 49039 to Elazer R. Edelman and the Deshpande Center for Technical Innovation at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.


          CONFLICT OF INTEREST
        

There is no conflict of interest to disclose

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Figure 1 Catheter position adjustment to obtain optimal volume signals. (A) Heart rate (HR), mean arterial pressure (MAP), stroke volume (SV) and systemic vascular resistance (SVR) over the course of dobutamine infusion (5 μg/kg/min). Dashed line indicates the start of drug infusion. Grey shaded areas indicate where catheter position was adjusted. Time marked every 4 minutes. (B) The position of the pressure-volume (PV) conductance catheter in left ventricle (LV) is optimised prior to starting the infusion. At steady state drug infusion, HR and SV have increased, while MAP and SVR have fallen from baseline. (C) The steady state pressure-volume loop prior to manipulation for position optimisation. (D) Catheter repositioning at steady state produced step changes in SV and SVR. LV pressure and volume axes have same scales in panels B, C, and D.

Figure 2 Correcting end-systolic pressure (ESP) rise artifact in pressure-volume (PV) loops. (A) PV conductance catheter position was adjusted (grey shaded areas) prior to start of dobutamine infusion (dashed line) and at steady state. Time marked every 4 minutes. PV loops (B) prior to dobutamine infusion (5 μg/kg/min). (C) At steady state the pressure during late systolic ejection rose sharply (ESP rise artifact). (D) After twisting the catheter up to 180° in either direction, the side-mounted manometer sensor escaped contact with beating endocardium to eliminate most, if not all, of the ESP rise artifact. LV pressure and volume axes have same scales in panels B, C, and D. Left ventricular pressure (LVP), arterial pressure (AP), stroke volume (SV), systemic vascular resistance (SVR).

Figure 3 Echocardiograms at end diastole during drug delivery with corresponding PV loops. (A) At peak dobutamine infusion, the catheter (dashed arrow) was in contact with endocardium (non-dashed arrows). Corresponding PV loops revealed an end-systolic pressure (ESP) rise artifact. (B) After optimising catheter position, the catheter was relocated to the middle of the ventricle and PV loops showed normal four-phase morphology.

Figure 4 End-systolic pressure (ESP) rise artifact in pressure-volume (PV) loops gave inaccurate max dP/dt values. A) PV loops and corresponding dP/dt tracings before dobutamine infusion (5 μg/kg/min), (B) during steady state (exhibiting an ESP rise artifact), and (C) at steady state after elimination of artifact by catheter reorientation. The maximum in the dP/dt signal coincided with isovolumetric contraction (dashed line, *). The ESP rise artifact gave a second peak in dP/dt signal that coincided with mid to late systolic ejection (solid line, #) and may exceed the peak from isovolumetric contraction. After adjustment of the catheter, the maximum in dP/dt signal coincided again with isovolumetric contraction (dashed line) and a lower measurement that is free from ESP rise artifact. Left ventricular (LV) pressure and volume axes have same scales in panels A, B, and C. Time marked every one-tenth second. Left ventricular pressure (LVP), arterial pressure (AP).

Figure 5 End-systolic pressure (ESP) rise artifact during inferior vena cava occlusions affected end-systolic pressure-volume relationship (ESPVR). (A) Pressure-volume (PV) loops before dobutamine infusion did not show ESP rise artifact and allowed linear regression (dashed line) of end systolic pressures (*) to calculate ESPVR. (B) Dobutamine infusion (5 μg/kg/min) caused an ESP rise artifact which prevented linear regression of the pressures at end systole for ESPVR calculations.

Figure 6 Normal saline bolus affects contractility assessment from inferior vena cava (IVC) occlusions. Pressure-volume (PV) loops with IVC occlusions (A) without saline bolus showed negligible shift in ventricular dimensions. (B) After saline bolus (1 mL) both diastolic and systolic ventricular dimensions fell steadily over 8 heart beats during IVC occlusion. Left ventricular (LV) pressure and volume axes have same scales in panels A and B. End-systolic pressures are denoted by * and line. (C) Zoomed-in view of haemodynamic indices including IVC occlusions before and after saline bolus. Time marked every 10 seconds. Dark shaded area = IVC occlusion, light shaded area = normal saline bolus. (D) Zoomed-out view of haemodynamic measurements. Adding 1 mL saline bolus increased arterial pressure, stroke volume (SV), and max dP/dt for over 15 minutes. Time marked every 2 minutes. Solid lines mark baseline haemodynamic values. Dashed lines mark elevated haemodynamic values after saline bolus. Left ventricular pressure (LVP), arterial pressure (AP), stroke volume (SV).

Table 1 Hemodynamic indices affected by ESP rise artifact

PV Loops*	Pes (mmHg)	SW (mmHg x μL)	Ea (mmg/μL)	Max dP/dt (mmHg/s)	
Pre-drug delivery	93.06	6,302	1.08	4,730	
Peak drug effect + ESP rise artifact	205.13	12,500	1.32	10,514	
Peak drug effect after adjusting PV catheter	84.13	8,082	0.66	6,308	
* PV loops are from Figure 3

Pes = end-systolic pressure, SW = stroke work, Ea = arterial elastance


   1 
            Cingolani OH  
            Kass DA  
           Pressure-volume relation analysis of mouse ventricular function Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2011 301 H2198 06 21926344 
2 
            Klabunde RE  
           Crystal Taylor Cardiac Function: The Cardiac Cycle. Cardiovascular Physiology Concepts 2 Philadelphia Lippincott Williams and Wilkins 2012 62 7 
3 
            Pacher P  
            Nagayama T  
            Mukhopadhyay P  
            Batkai S  
            Kass DA  
           Measurement of cardiac function using pressure–volume conductance catheter technique in mice and rats Nat Protoc 2008 3 9 1422 34 18772869 
4 
            Baan J  
            van der Velde ET  
            de Bruin HG  
            Smeenk GJ  
            Koops J  
            van Dijk AD  
            Temmerman D  
            Senden J  
            Buis B  
           Continuous measurement of left ventricular volume in animals and humans by conductance catheter Circulation 1984 70 812 23 6386218 
5 
            Georgakopoulos D  
            Mitzner WA  
            Chen CH  
            Byrne BJ  
            Millar HD  
            Hare JM  
            Kass DA  
           In vivo murine left ventricular pressure-volume relations by miniaturized conductance micromanometry Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 1998 274 H1416 22 
6 
            Pacher P  
            Mabley JG  
            Liaudet L  
            Evgenov OV  
            Marton A  
            Hasko G  
            Kollai M  
            Szabo C  
           Left ventricular pressure-volume relationship in a rat model of advanced aging-associated heart failure Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2004 287 H2132 7 15231502 
7 
            Shioura KM  
            Geenen dL  
            Goldspink PH  
           Assessment of cardiac function with the pressure-volume conductance system following myocardial infarction in mice Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2007 293 H2870 7 17720769 
8 
            Tam CW  
            Husmann K  
            Clark NC  
            Clark JE  
            Lazar Z  
            Ittner LM  
            Douglas G  
            Grant AD  
            Sougden D  
            Poston L  
            Poston R  
            McFadzean I  
            Marber MS  
            Fischer JA  
            Born W  
            Brain SD  
           Enhanced vascular responses to adrenomedullin in mice overexpressing receptor-activity Circ Res 2006 98 262 70 16373602 
9 
            Wallis J  
            Lygate CA  
            Fischer A  
            ten Hove M  
            Schneider JE  
            Sebag-Montefiore L  
            Dawson D  
            Hulbert K  
            Zhang W  
            Zhang MH  
            Watkins H  
            Clarke K  
            Neubauer S  
           Supranormal Myocardial Creatine and Phosphocreatine Concentrations Lead to Cardiac Hypertrophy and Heart Failure: Insights From Creatine Transporter Circulation 2005 112 3131 9 16286605 
10 
            Lovich MA  
            Wei AE  
            Maslov MY  
            Wu PI  
            Edelman ER  
           Local epicardial inotropic drug delivery allows targeted pharmacologic intervention with preservation of myocardial loading conditions J Pharm Sci 2011 100 11 4993 5006 21721001 
11 
            Maslov MY  
            Edelman ER  
            Wei AE  
            Pezone MJ  
            Lovich MA  
           High concentrations of drug in target tissues following local controlled release are utilized for both drug distribution and biologic effect: An example with epicardial inotropic drug delivery J Control Release 2013 171 2 201 7 23872515 
12 
            Batkai S  
            Pacher P  
            Osei-Hyiaman D  
            Radaeuva S  
            Liu J  
            Harvey-White J  
            Offertaler l  
            Mackie K  
            Rudd MA  
            Bukoski RD  
            Kunos G  
           Endocannabinoids acting at cannabinoid-1 receptors regulate cardiovascular function in hypertension Circulation 2004 110 14 1996 2002 15451779 
13 
            Filipsky T  
            Zatloukalova L  
            Mladenka P  
            Hrdina R  
           Acute initial haemodynamic changes in a rat isoprenaline model of cardiotoxicity Hum Exp Toxicol 2012 31 8 830 43 22381740 
14 
            Ruffolo RR Jr  
           The pharmacology of dobutamine Am J Med Sci 1987 294 4 244 8 3310640 
15 
            Sagawa K  
            Suga H  
            Shoukas AA  
            Bakalar KM  
           End-Systolic pressure/volume ratio: a new index of ventricular contractility Am J Cardiol 1977 40 5 748 53 920611 
16 
            Montgomery DE  
            Rundell VL  
            Goldspink PH  
            Urboniene D  
            Geenen DL  
            de Tombe PP  
            Buttrick PM  
           Protein kinase Ce induces systolic cardiac failure marked by exhausted inotropic reserve and intact Frank-Starling mechanism Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2005 289 5 H1881 8 15951344 
17 
            Nemoto S  
            DeFreitas G  
            Mann DL  
            Carabello BA  
           Effects of changes in left ventricular contractility on indexes of contractility in mice Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2002 283 6 H2504 10 12427596 
18 
            Suga H  
            Kitabatake A  
            Sagawa K  
           End-systolic pressure determines stroke volume from fixed end-diastolic volume in the isolated canine left ventricle under a constant contractile state Circ Res 1979 44 238 49 761306 
19 
            Toa W  
            Sherwood ER  
           β2-Microglobulin knockout mice treated with anti-asialoGM1 exhibit improved hemodynamics and cardiac contractile function during acute intra-abdominal sepsis Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2004 286 3 R569 75 14630624 
20 
            Van den Bergh A  
            Flameng W  
            Herijgers P  
           Parameters of ventricular contractility in mice: influence of load and sensitivity to changes in inotropic state Pflugers Arch 2008 455 987 94 17932685 
21 
            Zhao X  
            Ho D  
            Gao S  
            Hong C  
            Vatner DE  
            Vatner SF  
           Arterial Pressure Monitoring in Mice Curr Protoc Mouse Biol 2011 1 105 22 21686061 
22 
            Fischer CE  
            Spinelli JC  
            Willshaw P  
            Crottogini AJ  
            Forteza E  
            Clavin O  
            Valetnuzzi ME  
            Pichel RH  
           Detection of left ventricular regional myocardial ischaemia in dogs by intraventricular conductance catheter Cardiovasc Res 1988 22 3 185 92 3167942 
23 
            Khoury D  
            McAlister H  
            Wilkoff B  
            Simmons T  
            Rudy Y  
            McCowan R  
            Morant V  
            Castle L  
            Maloney J  
           Continuous right ventricular volume assessment by catheter measurement of impedance for antitachycardia system control Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 1989 12 12 1918 26 2481290 
24 
            Sugai TK  
            Tanaka A  
            Yoshizawa M  
            Shiraishi Y  
            Yambe T  
            Nitta S  
            Baba A  
           Estimation of maximum ventricular elastance under assistance with a rotary blood pump Artif Organs 2010 34 5 442 6 20633160 
25 
            O’Rourke MF  
            Kelly RP  
           Wave reflection in the systemic circulation and its implications in ventricular function J Hypertens 1993 11 4 327 37 8390498 
26 
            Karamanoglu M  
            Feneley MP  
           Late systolic pressure augmentation: role of left ventricular outflow patterns Am J Physiol 1999 277 2 Pt 2 H481 7 10444472 
27 
            Kelly R  
            Hayward C  
            Avolio A  
            O’Rourke M  
           Noninvasive determination of age-related changes in the human arterial pulse Circulation 1989 12 80 6 1652 9 2598428 
28 
            Marchais SJ  
            Guerin AP  
            Pannier BM  
            Levy BI  
            Safar ME  
            London GM  
           Wave reflections and cardiac hypertrophy in chronic uremia. Influence of body size Hypertension 1993 22 6 876 83 8244520 
29 
            O’Rourke M  
           Arterial stiffness, systolic blood pressure, and logical treatment of arterial hypertension Hypertension 1990 15 4 339 47 2180816 

