LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   01551573696FEBS LettFEBS Lett.FEBS letters0014-57931873-346818037376430463410.1016/j.febslet.2007.11.051EMS61720ArticleTNF-α and adipocyte biology Cawthorn William P. Sethi Jaswinder K. *Institute of Metabolic Science-Metabolic Research Laboratories and Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK* Corresponding author. Fax: +44 1223 330598. jks30@cam.ac.uk (J.K. Sethi)
16 1 2015 26 11 2007 9 1 2008 23 1 2015 582 1 117 131 This file is available to download for the purposes of text mining, consistent with the principles of UK copyright law.Dyslipidemia and insulin resistance are commonly associated with catabolic or lipodystrophic conditions (such as cancer and sepsis) and with pathological states of nutritional overload (such as obesity-related type 2 diabetes). Two common features of these metabolic disorders are adipose tissue dysfunction and elevated levels of tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). Herein, we review the multiple actions of this pro-inflammatory adipokine on adipose tissue biology. These include inhibition of carbohydrate metabolism, lipogenesis, adipogenesis and thermogenesis and stimulation of lipolysis. TNF-α can also impact the endocrine functions of adipose tissue. Taken together, TNF-α contributes to metabolic dysregulation by impairing both adipose tissue function and its ability to store excess fuel. The molecular mechanisms that underlie these actions are discussed.

ObesityType 2 diabetesMetabolic syndromeInsulin resistanceDyslipidemiaTNF signallingLipid metabolismAntiadipogenesis
   1. Adipose tissue-derived TNF-α in metabolic disease
Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) is a multi-functional cytokine that can regulate many cellular and biological processes such as immune function, cell differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis and energy metabolism. It is synthesised as a 26-kDa transmembrane monomer (mTNF-α) [1] that undergoes proteolytic cleavage by the TNF-α converting enzyme (TACE) to yield a 17-kDa soluble TNF-α molecule (sTNF-α) [2]. Both sTNF-α and mTNF-α can effect biological and metabolic responses [3,4] suggesting that mTNF-α may mediate paracrine and autocrine signals, leaving sTNF-α to mediate endocrine effects [5]. However, more recent indications are that the endocrine actions of sTNF-α depend on the maintenance of high circulating levels, which are more likely to occur in catabolic disease states such as the cachectic conditions associated with sepsis and cancer. In contrast, in obesity-related type 2 diabetes (T2D) the levels of both mTNF-α and sTNF-α are increased in adipose tissue [6,7] but circulating levels of sTNF-α are lower than in the catabolic diseases. Therefore whether adipose-derived sTNF-α exerts endocrine effects in systemic insulin resistance has been debated. Initially, circulating levels were often found to be low and sometimes not significantly elevated, prompting the conclusion that adipose tissue does not release TNF-α systemically. However, with the improved sensitivity and specificity of detection reagents, circulating sTNF-α now seems well correlated to BMI [8] and impairment in TNF-α processing can improve systemic insulin sensitivity [9,10]. Moreover, the diffuse nature of adipose tissue and its close association with metabolically relevant tissues such as muscle and pancreas suggests that the local but chronic production of adipose tissue-derived sTNF-α may still target non-adipose tissues during obesity. The confirmation that cytokine-producing macrophages are present in adipose tissue of obese diabetics further supports this notion [11]. Whether this also implicates TNF-α produced by resident macrophages (e.g. Kupffer cells) in the physiological regulation of energy metabolism in other tissues such as liver remains to be established. Importantly, as outlined in this review, adipose tissue-derived TNF-α can also affect systemic energy homeostasis indirectly by regulating both adipose function and expandability. This is pertinent to our understanding of the mechanisms of TNF-α action in obesity-associated metabolic dysregulation.

Evidence that TNF-α can itself impact on cellular metabolism in catabolic disease states dates back to the early 1980s when it was first purified and confirmed to be the long sought-after cancer toxin and also the cachexia-inducing factor, cachectin. More recently, TNF-α was shown to be relevant to adipocyte metabolism. In vitro studies initially suggested that TNF-α affects glucose homeostasis in adipocytes [12], promotes lipolysis in cultured adipocytes [13] and potently inhibits adipocyte differentiation and lipogenesis [14,15]. However, the first demonstration that TNF-α may be relevant to metabolic diseases associated with overnutrition (such as obesity-related T2D) was made by Hotamisligil and colleagues, who showed that TNF-α is elevated in adipose tissue from obese diabetic rodents and is a mediator of obesity-related insulin resistance and T2D [6].

The most compelling evidence of this subsequently came from studies showing that genetic blockade of TNF-α action can restore insulin sensitivity in vitro and in vivo [16,17]. Thus, TNF-α production appears to contribute to the pathogenesis of rodent obesity-induced insulin resistance. Evidence that this is also true for humans has been less well established and complicated by inconsistent early correlations of circulating sTNF-α with obesity. Additionally, several studies found that short-term treatment with an anti-TNF-α antibody [18,19] or with a sTNFR1-IgG1 chimera [20,21] failed to improve insulin sensitivity in obese type 2 diabetics or subjects with visceral obesity. One problem with interpreting these negative findings comes with the difficulty in determining whether local TNF-α activity (both mTNF-α and sTNF-α) is completely neutralised by such acute treatment. They also contrast with recent reports that find more chronic treatment with anti-TNF-α antibodies improves insulin sensitivity in both lean [22-24] and obese patients [25]. Furthermore, mounting evidence suggests that human obesity promotes a state of chronic, low-grade inflammation that contributes to insulin resistance and T2D. Taken together, TNF-α and/or its mechanisms of action might serve as a therapeutic targets to treat disorders associated with chronic inflammation, impaired glucose tolerance and dyslipidaemia.

1.1. What is the cellular source of adipose tissue-derived sTNF-α?
The vast majority of adipose tissue volume is comprised of lipid-laden adipocytes, and both isolated or differentiated adipocytes can produce TNF-α. Hence, it was initially assumed that adipocytes were the predominant source of the elevated adipose tissue TNF-α in obesity. However, adipose tissue also contains a significant stromovascular fraction (SVF), which contains numerous metabolically relevant cell types. These include preadipocytes, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, leukocytes and macrophages, and more recent studies have demonstrated that these SVF cells can produce substantially more TNF-α than adipocytes [11,26-28]. Indeed, obesity is associated with an increased infiltration of macrophages into adipose tissue [11,27,29,30], and it is likely that these adipose tissue macrophages (ATMs) are predominantly responsible for the elevated production of TNF-α during obesity [11]. Furthermore, recent mouse models have demonstrated that both the recruitment and classical activation of ATMs are required for the development of insulin resistance that is associated with obesity. Intriguingly, a recent study reports that, although macrophage-derived TNF-α can impair insulin sensitivity in TNF-α KO mice, the absence of TNF-α in macrophages only does not protect otherwise wild-type mice from the development of obesity-related insulin resistance [31]. Hence the relative contribution of macrophage and non-macrophage-derived TNF-α to obesity-induced insulin resistance remains incompletely understood.

1.2. What induces TNF-α expression in adipose tissue?
An important question that remains incompletely addressed is the nature of the original trigger that induces TNF-α production in adipose tissue. The regulation of TNF-α gene transcription clearly is cell type-specific, however since the vast majority of TNF-α production comes from classically activated macrophages, much interest is focused on identifying the initial trigger(s) that stimulate recruitment and activation of these immune cells into adipose tissue. One hypothesis is that increased adipocyte death in expanding adipose tissue may induce chemoattractant signals that recruit monocytes. Indeed, obesity in both rodents and humans is associated with increased numbers of apoptotic and necrotic adipocytes in white and brown adipose tissue (WAT and BAT, respectively)[32-34], and one study finds that the majority of macrophages in WAT of obese mice and humans are localised to dead adipocytes [34]. That obesity is associated with increased adipocyte death is consistent with the notion that adipose tissue may have a limited capacity for expansion that is reached during chronic over-nutrition. However, since secreted cytokines can also stimulate further cytokine production from and promote apoptosis of target cells, it is not currently apparent which is cause or consequence.

Nonetheless, it is clear that proper immune function is closely linked to nutritional status [35], and this may be due to the fact that dietary fatty acids (FA) can alter cytokine production [36]. This has prompted the alternative but not mutually exclusive suggestion that dietary components, in particular specific fats, may play a significant role in regulating the inflammatory profile of adipose tissue, at least in diet-induced obesity. Indeed, n–6 FA appear to be pro-inflammatory whereas long-chain, marine-derived n–3 FA elicit anti-atherogenic and anti-inflammatory effects. Intriguingly, calorie restriction and weight loss are associated with decreased cytokine production [37], providing a rational basis for nutritional strategies that target immune modulation.

With respect to TNF-α production specifically, levels of this cytokine are known to be nutritionally regulated but, importantly, can be enhanced by hyperinsulinaemia alone [38]. However, it is currently unclear whether the elevated production of TNF-α in obesity-related diabetes occurs secondarily to hyperinsulinaemia. Furthermore, in vivo cytokine action results from a complex interplay between networks of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. It is therefore likely that a co-ordinate regulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10 may play a role in both TNF-α production and action in vivo.

1.3. Molecular mechanisms of TNF-α action in adipocytes
TNF-α mediates its biological effects on adipose tissue via two distinct cell surface receptors: tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor 1 (TNFR1) (a 55- or 60-kDa peptide in rodents and humans, respectively); and tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor 2 (TNFR2) (a 75- or 80-kDa peptide in rodents and humans, respectively). Both receptors are ubiquitously expressed transmembrane glycoproteins that trimerise upon ligand binding. Like TNF-α, both TNFRs can be proteolytically cleaved to release soluble forms (sTNFR). These may be involved in the neutralisation and excretion of TNF-α and thereby may modulate TNF-α activity both temporally and spatially [39]. These soluble receptors may also be more accessible biomarkers for elevated TNF-α activity. The circulating levels of both soluble TNFRs can be nutritionally regulated [8] and have been reported to increase in both obesity and in non-obese adults with pro-atherogenic lipid profiles [40,41].

Although TNFR1 and TNFR2 are highly homologous in their ligand-binding extracellular domains, their intracellular domains exhibit no sequence homology and they activate divergent signalling pathways [42]. Results from numerous investigations suggest that the signals transduced by TNFR1 mediate the majority of effects of TNF-α on adipose tissue function. Human and murine TNF-α are equally effective at impairing insulin signalling in murine adipocytes [43]. This suggests that signals transduced via TNFR1 are sufficient for this effect, because human TNF-α can only activate murine TNFR1 [44]. Furthermore, lack of TNFR1, but not lack of TNFR2, significantly improves insulin sensitivity in ob/ob mice and cultured adipocytes [45,46]. Finally, studies using TNFR1 and/or TNFR2-deficient preadipocytes show that it is TNFR1 that is required for the inhibition of adipogenesis by both soluble and transmembrane TNF-α [4,47]. Thus, TNF-α modulates adipose tissue function predominantly through TNFR1. Nevertheless, other studies suggest that TNF-α may also mediate some effects on adipocytes through TNFR2 [40,48-50]. However, knowledge of the exact role of TNFR2 in TNF-α-mediated adipose tissue dysfunction is limited. In contrast, many of the signalling pathways activated via TNFR1 have been implicated in mediating the actions of TNF-α on adipose tissue (Fig. 1). Herein, we will limit our discussion to the pathways that have been shown to effect aspects of adipocyte biology specifically.

Neither TNFR has intrinsic catalytic activity. Instead, they can transmit signals by recruiting intracellular adapter proteins, which interact with distinct domains of the cytoplasmic portions of the receptors to activate specific downstream signals. For example, several adapter complexes are recruited to the trimeric death domain of TNFR1 (TNFR1-DD), which has been implicated in mediating many of the effects of TNF-α on adipocyte biology [47,51] (Fig. 1). As its name indicates the TNFR1-DD is responsible for the cytotoxic signals induced by TNF-α. However, as with many TNF-α actions, these can be cell type-specific; although preadipocytes are more sensitive to TNF-α-induced cell death, TNF-α can also induce apoptosis in adipocytes [52,53]. This is likely to be mediated by TNFR1, at least in brown adipocytes [53].

The TNFR1-DD can also activate cell survival and pro-inflammatory signalling pathways that lead to the activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NFκB) and of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades, such as those involving extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK), p38 MAPK and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) (Fig. 1). These signalling pathways have been reported to be activated by TNF-α in adipose tissue and remain good candidates for mediating metabolic dysregulation [54-58]. However, TNFR1 and its DD can activate a number of additional signalling pathways with metabolic relevance to adipocyte biology, such as acidic sphingomyelinase (aSMase), nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT), protein kinase A (PKA), CREB, protein kinase C (PKC), PI3K and calcium release (Fig. 1). However, the receptor-proximal events that lead to these remain to be completely elucidated, as do the mechanisms that facilitate sustained TNF-α-induced signalling.

2. TNF-α and adipocyte insulin resistance
Adipose tissue is a key regulator of systemic carbohydrate metabolism and may play an important role in glucose sensing. This is supported by the fact that mice engineered to selectively lack the glucose transporter GLUT4 in their adipose tissue develop insulin resistance in liver and skeletal muscle, resulting in systemic glucose intolerance and hyperinsulinaemia [59]. It is now well established that TNF-α can induce a state of insulin resistance in adipocytes [60]. Indeed, the mechanisms underlying this effect have been the subject of intense research. Early reports identified that TNFR1-induced signals are required and sufficient to impair insulin action [43,46,48], and a recent report suggests that these can be narrowed down to those induced by the TNFR1-DD [51]. However, several downstream mechanisms have been proposed by which TNF-α might cause insulin resistance in adipose tissue. These are discussed next.

2.1. Transcriptional mechanisms of TNF-α-induced insulin resistance
TNF-α suppresses the expression of many proteins that are required for insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in adipocytes, such as the insulin receptor (IR), insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) and GLUT4 [61-63]. Although mechanisms such as accelerated proteasomal degradation (e.g. IRS-1) and impaired translation may be important, more is known about how TNF alters their expression at the transcriptional level.

Amongst the first transcription factors shown to be targeted by TNF-α signalling in adipocytes was the ‘adipogenic master regulator’, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) [64-66]. TNF-α can target PPARγ by inhibiting the expression of PPARγ mRNA and also through suppression of its transcriptional activity. The latter can occur by promoting serine phosphorylation of key regulatory residues in the N-terminal domain of PPARγ (e.g. S112 in murine PPARγ2 or S84 in human PPARγ1) [67,68]. This phosphorylation event can be mediated by JNK and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) [67,68] and has been implicated in TNF-α-induced suppression of PPARγ in hepatic stellate cells [69]. Furthermore, in vitro over expression of PPARγ S112A in 3T3-L1 adipocytes prevents the TNF-α-mediated downregulation of IRS-1 [70], and mice with a homozygous S112A mutation in PPARγ remain insulin-sensitive on a high fat diet [71]. Hence, TNF-α may suppress PPARγ activity in adipocytes by promoting its phosphorylation. TNF-α may also inhibit PPARγ activity through activation of the classic TNF-α-induced transcription factor, NFκB. Specifically, p65/RelA has been suggested to directly bind to PPARγ in complex with its co-activator, PGC1, thereby preventing binding to PPARγ response elements [57]. This is consistent with the observation that p65 can suppresses PPARγ activity in the absence of any NFκB DNA-binding sites [66].

Suppression of PPARγ mRNA levels is also observed following treatment with TNF-α. How this is achieved remains incompletely understood. One mechanism stems from the suggestion that PPARγ expression is itself upregulated by PPARγ activity. Hence, in TNF-α-treated adipocytes, downregulation of PPARγ activity is likely to also result in reduced mRNA levels. This would also be true for another adipogenic transcription factor and PPARγ target gene, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBPα). TNF-α also suppresses C/EBPα mRNA expression. Since the GLUT4 promoter contains response elements for, and is regulated by, both PPARγ and C/EBPα [54], it is likely that TNF-α can suppress GLUT4 expression via a PPARγ and C/EBPα-dependent mechanism. Whether this is true for all genes that are downregulated in insulin-resistant adipose tissue is unclear.

Recently, the protein kinase mitogen activated protein kinase kinase kinase kinase 4 (MAP4K4), an activator of the JNK signalling pathway, has also been implicated in TNF-α-induced suppression of PPARγ and GLUT4 mRNA in adipocytes [72]. TNF-α upregulates MAP4K4 expression in mature adipocytes in a TNFR1-dependent manner, and knockdown of MAP4K4 attenuates TNF-α-induced suppression of GLUT4 expression [72,73]. Hence MAP4K4 may contribute to the suppression of PPARγ and GLUT4 by TNF-α (Fig. 1). However, how MAP4K4 activation leads to the suppression of PPARγ is currently unknown, as is the role (if any) of MAP4K4 in the pathogenesis of metabolic complications in vivo.

The transcriptional events required for TNF-α-induced insulin resistance may also involve the transcriptional activity of NFκB itself, and hence NFκB target gene expression. However, this has yet to be formally demonstrated with respect to TNF-α-induced insulin resistance in adipocytes. Despite this, there is ample evidence to support the requirement for the upstream signals that lead to NFκB activation in TNF-α-induced insulin resistance in vitro and in vivo [63,74-76]. Furthermore, several potential NFκB target genes that are upregulated by TNF-α in adipocytes have been implicated in adipocyte insulin resistance. One example is suppressor of cytokine signalling-3 (SOCS-3), which inhibits IR-dependent IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation and thereby suppresses insulin-stimulated glucose uptake [77-79] (Fig. 2). Overexpression of SOCS-3 in adipose tissue causes local insulin resistance [80], whereas knockdown of SOCS-3 in adipocytes attenuates the TNF-α-mediated suppression of tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2 [79]. Hence, the upregulation of SOCS-3 may contribute to TNF-α-mediated suppression of IR-proximal signalling (Fig. 2).

Finally, TNF-α may induce insulin resistance through the upregulation of PP2C gene expression, resulting in suppression of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity. This has recently been implicated in skeletal muscle insulin resistance [81]. Whether this occurs in adipose tissue remains to be determined. However, given that metformin may be able to reverse some actions of TNF-α in adipose tissue [82], this seems an intriguing possibility (Fig. 2).

2.2. Crosstalk between TNF-α and proximal insulin signalling
TNF-α can also compromise IR/IRS-1 signalling independently of transcriptional regulation [83]. This is thought to occur by direct signalling events that mediate a crosstalk between TNFR1-induced pathways and proximal insulin signals (Figs. 1 and 2). Indeed, TNF-α inhibits insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of both the IR and IRS proteins. The latter has been best studied and occurs by induction of serine phosphorylation of IRS-1 [43,84,85]. Over 20 IRS-1 serine kinases and an even greater number of putative serine phosphorylation sites have been implicated in the negative regulation of insulin signalling. In vitro studies have established that some sites can be phosphorylated by multiple serine kinases and numerous sites can be phosphorylated by the same kinase [85]. Whether these kinases are also relevant in vivo has begun to be substantiated by investigations of their genetic ablation, at least for JNK, PKCθ and IκB kinase beta (IKKβ) (liver-specific), in rodent models of obesity and insulin resistance. The use of site-specific antibodies has also been instrumental in dissecting the involvement of site-specific kinase activities in stimulus-induced phosphorylation. However, very few of these serine phosphorylation sites have been studied with respect to TNF-α action in adipocytes. One site that has been well characterised is serine 307 in rIRS1 (corresponding to S312 in human IRS-1). Phosphorylation of this residue impairs IR-IRS interactions and promotes IRS-1 degradation (Fig. 2) [86-88]. Studies with pharmacological inhibitors and/or activators have implicated numerous upstream kinases in IRS-S307 phosphorylation, including ERK1/2 [83,86], JNK [87,89], IKKβ [90], and mTOR [91]. Although each of these can be activated by TNF-α, not all of these have been demonstrated to directly interact with endogenous IRS-1 in adipocytes and the sequential nature of the signalling cascade(s) remains to be delineated. Furthermore additional kinases such as PKC isoforms have also been implicated in TNF-α-induced insulin resistance in non-adipose cells and these may also be involved in Ser307 phosphorylation in adipocytes.

In addition to impairing protein-protein interactions, TNF-α-induced serine phosphorylation can also disrupt protein–phospholipid interactions. Recently, our laboratory and others have independently identified S24 of IRS-1 as a substrate site for PKC and IRAK [92,93]. This single modification is sufficient to impair lipid binding, intracellular localisation of the IRS1-PH domain and reduce IR-IRS1 interactions and signalling. This ultimately reduces insulin-stimulated signalling and glucose uptake. TNF-α, IL-1 or the diacylglycerol mimetic, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), can all induce phosphorylation of S24. However, unlike S307 or S612, this site is not phosphorylated following chronic insulin treatment or by C-2 ceramides [93]. Hence, this represents a modification of IRS-1 that is regulated by a limited range of pathological stimuli and that may not play a role in physiological negative feedback regulation of insulin signalling.

In addition to altering cellular serine kinase activity, TNF-α action can alter membrane lipid composition and increase the availability of reactive lipids such as diacylglycerols and ceramides (Figs. 1 and 2). These can lead to insulin resistance through several means, including activating serine kinase signalling cascades and altered membrane fluidity, which impairs receptor internalisation, cycling and function. TNF-α-induced generation of ceramides has previously been linked to insulin resistance via IRS-1 serine kinases [43,94-97] (Fig. 2) and ceramide biosynthesis has recently been suggested to be required for rodent obesity-induced insulin resistance in vivo [98]. Furthermore, ceramides can be metabolised to glycosphingolipids and gangliosides such as GM3, which have also been shown to alter IR tyrosine kinase signal transduction [99] (Fig. 2). Indeed, we have shown that TNF-α raises GM3 levels in adipocytes and both obesity- and TNF-α-induced insulin resistance can be reversed by inhibiting the activity of glucosylceramide synthase, a key enzyme in the synthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides [100]. Hence, TNF-α-induced insulin resistance can be mediated through TNFR1-dependent signals that activate SMase and thereby increase the levels of ceramides and gangliosides (Figs. 1 and 2).

2.3. Role of TNF-α in obesity-associated ER stress, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction
Obesity-related insulin resistance has recently been linked to oxidative stress and organelle dysfunction, i.e. mitochondrial dysfunction and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress [35]. These are all features that can also be induced by TNF-α and which have been linked to activation of the JNK or NFκB pathways (Figs. 1 and 2). Indeed, it has been suggested that production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) contributes to both TNF-α-induced NFκB activation [101] and TNF-α-induced insulin resistance [102] (Fig. 2). Additionally, oxidative stress may promote increased production of TNF-α under adverse metabolic conditions [103]. Interestingly, in adipose tissue TNF-α upregulates the expression of many genes that encode proteins involved in responses to ER stress or oxidative stress [62] (Figs. 1 and 2). Furthermore, TNF-α downregulates the expression of genes that encode components of the electron transport chain [104] and may thereby induce mitochondrial dysfunction. Indeed, TNF-α has recently been shown to inhibit FA oxidation in differentiated human adipocytes [104].

3. TNF-α and adipocyte endocrinology
Adipose tissue is now also recognised as an endocrine organ that secretes many products that can impact on numerous aspects of whole organism biology, including energy homeostasis, immune function and reproduction [105]. Several of these adipose tissue-derived secreted proteins, termed ‘adipokines’, are also involved in obesity-related metabolic complications. Interestingly, TNF-α action on adipose tissue can alter the production of many adipokines and this is relevant to the systemic effects of TNF-α on insulin sensitivity and whole body energy homeostasis (Fig. 2).

3.1. Insulin-sensitising adipokines
The principle insulin-sensitising adipokines are adiponectin and leptin [105]. Adiponectin enhances insulin sensitivity and improves the serum lipid profile through AMPK activation and increased FA oxidation [106,107]. Conversely, disruption of adiponectin expression causes insulin resistance [108]. TNF-α may therefore induce systemic insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia by suppressing the production of adiponectin [63,109-111]; indeed, circulating levels of adiponectin inversely correlate with plasma levels of TNF-α [112,113]. The mechanism by which this is mediated is likely to involve suppression of PPARγ [114], C/EBPβ [115] and/or through JNK activation[58,88].

The regulation of leptin production by TNF-α is less clear. Instead of reducing the production of this insulin-sensitiser, TNF-α promotes leptin release from adipocytes, [116,117] and circulating TNF-α levels positively correlate with serum leptin concentrations in obese patients with T2D [118,119]. In the absence of TNF-α, obesity-induced hyperleptinaemia is significantly reduced. However, the mechanism by which this is mediated is currently unclear as the transcriptional upregulation is context-dependent [116,120,121].

Visfatin (also called PBEF/Nampt) has recently been identified as a putative adipokine that is secreted by visceral fat and that stimulates insulin signalling [122]. However, the debate regarding its role as an adipokine continues [123], and studies investigating the effects of TNF-α on visfatin expression have yielded conflicting results; whereas TNF-α can suppress expression of visfatin in 3T3-L1 adipocytes [124], one recent study suggests that TNF-α markedly upregulates visfatin expression in human adipose tissue [125]. Hence the exact role of visfatin and its regulation by TNF-α requires further investigation.

3.2. Pro-inflammatory adipokines and resistin
In non-obese healthy subjects, the cytokine-mediated interplay between the immune system and adipose tissue maybe the means of releasing surplus fuel for utilisation by activated immune cells during infection and/or inflammation. TNF-α can regulate the production of other pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-6 and IL-1) and thereby further mediate and/ or amplify its effects on peripheral organs.

Resistin was originally implicated in the pathogenesis of obesity-associated insulin resistance in mice [126], whereas such a role in humans is still debated. This is due in part to species-specific differences in its cellular source [127]. Nonetheless, in humans, resistin has many features of a pro-inflammatory cytokine and may play a role in inflammatory diseases. Some studies suggest that regulatory interactions exist between TNF-α and resistin, but these may also be cell type-specific. TNF-α suppresses expression of resistin in 3T3-L1 adipocytes[128], whereas it promotes expression of resistin from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) [129]. The latter may be a major source of resistin in humans. Conversely, human resistin promotes the expression of TNF-α and other cytokines by various cell types via an NFκB-dependent pathway [129,130]. Therefore, in the context of the metabolic syndrome, it is possible that increased expression of resistin could contribute to the elevated levels of adipose tissue TNF-α during obesity. This possibility has yet to be investigated.

3.3. PAI-1
Although plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) has traditionally been linked to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, recent evidence suggests that it is also involved in the development of obesity and insulin resistance [131]. TNF-α upregulates PAI-1 expression in adipocytes and adipose tissue via a pathway that involves activation of p42/p44, PKC, p38, PI3-K, NFκB and ROS production [50,63,132-135] (Fig. 2). Interestingly, TNFR2-derived signals may actually attenuate the induction of PAI-1 expression by TNF-α [50] (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, TNF-α is likely to contribute to obesity-associated increases in PAI-1 and may thereby promote the cardiovascular complications of metabolic syndrome.

4. TNF-α and adipocyte lipid metabolism
The most distinguishing aspect of adipocytes is their ability to store (through lipogenesis) and release (through lipolysis and/or thermogenesis) surplus energy appropriately. Hence proper adipocyte function plays a pivotal role in the regulation of whole-body lipid metabolism. These functions can be regulated by numerous extracellular stimuli, such as insulin, cortisol, catecholamines, growth hormone, testosterone, free fatty acids (FFA) and cytokines [136]. TNF-α action on adipocytes can directly alter lipid metabolism through inhibition of FFA uptake and lipogenesis and stimulation of FFA release via lipolysis. In this way, adipose tissue-derived TNF-α can contribute to the development of dyslipidaemia and resultant metabolic complications.

4.1. Inhibition of fatty acid uptake and lipogenesis by TNF-α
In adipocytes excess energy is stored in the form of lipid droplets rich in neutral triacylglycerols (TAG). TAG synthesis (or lipogenesis) results from the esterification of FA-derived Acyl CoA and Gycerol-3-P. FA are derived from three sources: (a) from the circulation, (b) from lipolysis of intracellular TAG or (c) de novo FA synthesis from glucose. Similarly, Glycerol-3-P can be sourced from glycerol, glucose, and amino acids (Fig. 3A). Hence, the overall metabolic flux of lipids into TAG is dependent on the availability of relevant substrates and the regulation of several enzymatic pathways, which may include those that are not classically thought of as lipogenic.

By inducing adipocyte insulin resistance, TNF-α can impair glucose uptake into adipocytes. TNF-α also inhibits the uptake of FFA. Although the mechanism of FFA uptake is being debated, TNF-α does downregulate the expression of FA transport protein (FATP) and translocase (FAT) in adipose tissue[137], as well as the FA-binding protein FABP4/aP2. FFA uptake into adipocytes is also facilitated by the extracellular expression and activity of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) [136]. TNF-α has been shown to downregulate LPL expression in both murine adipose tissue and in 3T3-L1 adipocytes [62,66], likely via a TNFR1-dependent pathway [138]. However, studies investigating the effect of TNF-α on LPL expression in human adipose tissue have reported conflicting results [139,140].

In addition to suppressing gene expression of key proteins of FA uptake, TNF-α reduces the transcript levels and expression of many proteins involved in glyceroneogenesis, de novo FA synthesis and esterification (Fig. 3A). This leads to impaired triglyceride storage in adipose tissue. Notably, most of these genes are regulated by PPARγ activity. Thus TNF-α may mediate these effects primarily through the inhibition of PPARγ activity and expression.

4.2. TNF-α-induced lipolysis
The primary mechanism by which surplus fuel is made available from adipocytes is through stimulated lipolysis. This process liberates FA and glycerol from stored lipid and is physiologically activated by hormones such as catecholamines that stimulate cAMP production and PKA-dependent phosphorylation of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) and perilipins (Fig. 3B). TNF-α also potently stimulates lipolysis and this may contribute to hyperlipidaemic conditions. The increased availability of FFA may be shuttled into de novo ceramide production in adipose tissue (Fig. 3A) but can also cause lipotoxicity-induced insulin resistance in more distal organs.

Mechanistically, TNF-α can stimulate lipolysis in the absence of insulin, suggesting that TNF-α does not simply antagonise insulin’s anti-lipolytic actions. In addition, extracellular glucose is required for TNF-α-mediated adipocyte lipolysis[141], suggesting that a nutritional status or substrate availability is required (e.g. provision of ATP). However, the mechanism by which TNF-α induces adipocyte lipolysis has yet to be completely elucidated. Nevertheless, some information is available. Activation of a TNFR1-dependent pathway is both necessary and sufficient [13,46,138,142] and the downstream signals involve activation of ERK1/2, JNK, AMPK, IKK and PKA, since inhibitors of these kinases can prevent TNF-α-induced lipolysis [55,143,144]. Furthermore, a recent study suggests that, in adipocytes, TNF-α signals via a trimeric G protein, Gαq/11, and an adapter protein, β-arrestin-1, to mediate ERK activation and lipolysis [145]. However, TNF-α-induced activation of ERK1/2, JNK and IKK in adipocytes is rapid and transient [54,55], whereas detection of TNF-α-induced lipolysis takes &gt;6 h. This suggests that more distal TNF-α-induced events remain to be identified, which are likely to be controlled by transcriptional regulation (Fig. 3B). This is consistent with the observations that TNF-α-induced lipolysis is sensitive to inhibition by TZD and NFκB inhibitors [146]. Furthermore, TNF-α treatment decreases the expression of many genes involved in preventing lipolysis, such as Giα, PDE3B, and perilipin [55,143,146-148] (Fig. 3B). Again, TNF-α-mediated suppression of PPARγ is likely to play an important role since inhibition of PPARγ results in decreased perilipin expression [149], and adenoviral expression of PPARγ S112A in 3T3-L1 adipocytes attenuates TNF-α-induced decreases in TG content [70]. Nevertheless, a less-intuitive aspect that remains unresolved is that TNF-α also decreases the expression of key lipolytic genes e.g. HSL, ATGL, β1-AR and β3-AR [62,150]. In contrast, very few reports have identified upregulation of lipolytic genes (e.g. β2-AR upregulation in murine adipocytes) [151] (Fig. 3B).

5. TNF-α and adipocyte differentiation
In addition to its effects on lipid metabolism in mature adipocytes, TNF-α may impair the lipid storage capacity of adipose tissue by suppressing the recruitment and differentiation of new adipocytes from precursor cells. The transcriptional regulation of adipocyte differentiation has been extensively studied, at least in vitro (for reviews see, [152,153]). In brief, adipogenesis is driven by a transcriptional cascade, which is characterised by the early, transient expression of C/EBPβ and C/EBPδ. This precedes the induction of C/EBPα and PPARγ, the master regulators of adipogenesis. TNF-α inhibits adipogenesis by preventing the induction of PPARγ and C/EBPα expression [47], thereby also preventing the induction of genes that are responsible for the mature adipocyte phenotype (e.g. aP2, Glut4, ATGL) [62].

5.1. Transcriptional targets of TNF-α in preadipocytes
Although TNF-α does not prevent the early expression of C/EBPβ or C/EBPδ, it is likely that it inhibits the PPARγ-mediated expression of PPARγ and C/EBPα, as has been discussed above (see Section 2.1). This is proposed to be mediated via the TAK1/TAB1/NIK kinase cascade to activate the p65/RelA subunit of NFκB, which acts to sequester and prevent PGC/PPARγ complex function [57]. Currently, it is not clear whether this is the primary target of TNF-α in preadipocytes, as these cells tend to have very low levels of PPARγ protein (compared to mature adipocytes) and basal PPARγ transcript levels are not downregulated during TNF-α-induced anti-adipogenesis [47]. Nonetheless, TZD treatment can antagonise TNF-α-induced anti-adipogenesis [154], confirming that PPARγ function is an important factor. Additionally, MAP4K4 has been proposed to be a negative regulator of PPARγ and adipogenesis and its expression can be induced by TNF-α (at least in adipocytes) [72]; however its role and mechanism of action in TNF-α-induced anti-adipogenesis in preadipocytes remains to be defined.

Another negative regulator of adipogenesis that acts early and suppresses PPARγ and C/EBPα expression is Wnt10b[155]. This is an important physiological factor involved in lineage commitment and determination. The canonical Wnt signalling pathway regulates the expression of Wnt target genes via stabilisation of β-catenin, a co-activator of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of transcription factors. Activation of this pathway has been shown to inhibit PPARγ expression and lipid accumulation both in vitro and in vivo. Conversely, PPARγ can negatively regulate canonical Wnt signalling [156]. Recently, we noticed that TNF-α-induced suppression of PPARγ and C/EBPα coincides with enhanced expression of several reported mediators of anti-adipogenesis that are also targets of the Wnt/β-catenin/TCF4 pathway. These include c-myc, cyclin D1, and PPARdelta [157-160]. By abrogating β-catenin/TCF signalling in 3T3-L1 cells, either via stable knockdown of β-catenin or by overexpressing dominant-negative TCF4 (dnTCF4), we demonstrated that TNF-α-induced anti-adipogenesis is dependent on β-catenin/TCF4 activity [47]. Therefore both TNF-α and canonical Wnt signalling pathways seem to converge to inhibit adipogenesis at the level of TCF4-dependent transcription. Intriguingly, TCF4 is also called transcription factor 7 like-2 (TCF7L2), and recent studies have identified a strong association between at least 2 SNPS in the TCF7L2 gene and type 2 diabetes [161,162]. These risk-conferring genotypes are also strongly associated with impaired β-cell function, development and possibly survival [163,164], while their adipose tissue expression may be associated with susceptibility of obese individuals to developing diabetes [165].

In addition to transcriptional events, TNFR-proximal events required for TNF-α-induced anti-adipogenesis have been elucidated. Here, both secreted and transmembrane TNF-α can inhibit adipogenesis via TNFR1 and a functional TNFR1-DD [4,47,166]. We have also shown that TNF-α-induced maintenance of β-catenin during anti-adipogenesis requires a functional TNFR1-DD [47]. A number of signals downstream of this domain have been linked to suppression of C/EBPα and PPARγ. These include activation of ERK, JNK, IKKβ and ceramide synthesis via aSMase [56,167], each of which has been suggested to exert anti-adipogenic effects[57,68,88,167,168]. However, this contrasts with other reports suggesting that inhibition of JNK activation does not reverse TNF-α-mediated suppression of PPARγ expression [56,72]. Furthermore, ERK activation may stimulate PPARγ expression during the early stages of adipogenesis, possibly by enhancing C/EBPβ activity [169,170], and NFκB activity reportedly increases during adipogenesis without TNF-α [171]. In contrast, exogenous ceramides do appear to mimic TNF-α actions to inhibit adipogenesis by blocking the transcriptional activity of C/EBPβ, resulting in suppression of C/EBPα and PPARγ mRNA [172]. However, the identities of the mediators in ceramide-induced anti-adipogenesis remain unknown.

The dissection of upstream signals has been complicated by the fact that, unlike adipocytes, preadipocytes can be particularly sensitive to TNF-α-induced cell death during anti-adipogenesis. This is often enhanced when preadipocytes are pre-treated with inhibitors of pro-survival signals, including NFκB. Indeed, ceramides are well known inducers of apoptosis and this is entirely consistent with TNF-α-induced toxic signals emanating from the TNFR1-DD. However pharmacological attempts to separate apoptotic signals from anti-adipogenic signals have been notoriously difficult. Nonetheless, we and others have demonstrated that picomolar concentrations of TNF-α can inhibit adipogenesis without inducing cell death [47,56]. Furthermore, in our recent study we observed that knock down of β-catenin in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes enhanced their sensitivity to TNF-α-induced cell death. Taken together we speculate that the signals induced by TNFR1-DD that lead to anti-adipogenesis in vitro are intricately involved in cell survival as well as differentiation. Future investigations should shed light on the nature of these events and whether this is relevant to adipose tissue plasticity and/or expansion in vivo.

6. TNF-α, brown adipose tissue and thermogenesis
Whereas white adipose tissue (WAT) is primarily responsible for storage and release of surplus fuel and generation of endocrine signals, brown adipose tissue (BAT) specialises in energy expenditure via beta-oxidation that is coupled to thermogenesis [173]. The thermogenic capacity of BAT is an important factor that contributes to the development of obesity-associated metabolic dysregulation. Indeed, obesity is associated with reductions in thermogenically active BAT [32,53,174] and transgenic mice lacking BAT become obese [173]. Conversely, increased UCP-1 expression in BAT is associated with protection against metabolic syndrome in mice [175]. Numerous studies suggest that TNF-α can modulate the thermogenic capacity of BAT. However, these studies have yielded conflicting results. For example, some reports suggest that administration of TNF-α increases BAT thermogenic activity, possibly by upregulating UCP expression [176,177]. This is consistent with the role of TNF-α in mediating increased energy expenditure in catabolic states (e.g during cachexia). However, TNF-α may mediate these effects by targeting the central nervous system, rather than BAT per se [178]. In contrast, some studies suggest that TNF-α impairs BAT thermogenesis via downregulation of UCP-1 and β3-AR expression [53,151,179,180]. These discrepancies may result from differences in the experimental models used. Nevertheless, compelling evidence for the role of TNF-α in obesity-associated alterations in BAT thermogenesis comes from studies in obese mice that lack TNF-α function. Indeed, the obesity-associated decreases in UCP-1 and β3-AR expression are attenuated in these mice [53]. Accordingly, the lack of TNFRs significantly improves the thermoadaptive capacity of obese animals [53].

TNF-α may also compromise BAT thermogenesis by promoting BAT atrophy or by impairing BAT differentiation. Obesity is associated with increased apoptosis of brown adipocytes [32], and several studies demonstrate that TNF-α can induce apoptosis of brown adipocytes [32,53,181]. Similarly, TNF-α may prevent the differentiation of brown adipocytes[180,182]. Several studies suggest that adrenergic stimulation promotes the transdifferentiation of white adipocytes into brown adipocytes (reviewed in [173]). Indeed, this phenomenon is significantly impaired in mice lacking the β3-AR [183]. Hence, by downregulating β3-AR expression in WAT, TNF-α might indirectly attenuate the transdifferentiation of white adipocytes into brown adipocytes and thereby impair thermogenesis.

7. Summary
Although the oncolytic and cachectic properties of TNF-α have been studied for over a century, the last decade alone has unveiled many new aspects of TNF-α action on adipocyte biology. In addition to its role in inducing insulin resistance in adipose tissue, its local actions can impact on whole body insulin sensitivity through increased FFA and altered adipokine production. Furthermore, TNF-α can also significantly alter the lipid storage and oxidative capacity of adipose tissues. Hence, adipose tissue-derived TNF-α can contribute to the metabolic complications associated with obesity by altering both adipose tissue function and expandability.

This multi-faceted nature of TNF-α is entirely in keeping with its multifunctional classification and so it should come as no surprise that this potent cytokine is capable of stimulating a variety of signalling pathways in a context-dependent manner. While the exact components of these signals remain to be elucidated, it is becoming increasingly clear that a complex network of signals emanating from the TNFR1 death domain converge with other signalling pathways to influence cell fate determination and metabolism. It is likely that these signals will vary significantly depending upon the amount and duration of exposure, as well nutritional status and the extracellular milieu. However, as new ‘omic’ technologies become available, it should be possible to investigate the influence of these additional factors and better our understanding at a more global, systems level.

Acknowledgements
We apologise for the inevitable omission of many relevant references due to space limitations. Research in our lab is funded by a Medical Research Council studentship (W.C.), a Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) David Phillips Fellowship (J.K.S.) and grants from Diabetes UK, BBSRC and European Union Sixth Framework Programme.

Abbreviations
TNF-αtumour necrosis factor-alpha

sTNF-αsoluble tumour necrosis factor-alpha

mTNF-αtransmembrane tumour necrosis factor-alpha

T2Dtype 2 diabetes

TNFR1tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor 1

TNFR2tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor 2

WATwhite adipose tissue

BATbrown adipose tissue

PPARγperoxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma

C/EBPαCCAAT/enhancer binding protein

LPLlipoprotein lipase

HSLhormone sensitive lipase

NFκBnuclear factor-kappa B

IκBinhibitor of NFκB

IKKβIκB kinase beta

JNKc-jun N-terminal kinase

ERK1/2extracellular signal-regulated kinase

AMPKAMP-activated protein kinase

Fig. 1 Signalling pathways induced by TNF-α in adipose tissue
Upon TNFR1 activation the adapter molecule TRADD (TNFR-associated death domain protein) interacts with the TNFR1-DD. TRADD recruits downstream adapter molecules such as Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD), TNFR-associated factor 2 (TRAF2), receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-activating death domain protein (MADD). These adapters then mediate the activation of divergent downstream signalling pathways. Apoptosis: FADD recruits caspases such as caspase 8 to TNFR1, thereby forming the TNFR1 death-inducing signalling complex (DISC). This complex activates downstream caspases, leading to apoptosis. Ceramide production: the TNFR1-DD activates acidic sphingomyelinase (aSMase), which hydrolyses sphingolipids to produce ceramide. Ceramides can be converted into toxic lipids, such as the ganglioside GM3. Ceramides and gangliosides may then mediate transcriptional effects, possibly by activation of NFκB. Ceramides can also stimulate apoptosis and impair insulin signalling, and both ceramide and caspases may inhibit AKT. NFκB activation: TRAF2 and RIP1 mediate NFκB activation by recruiting the IKK (inhibitor of NFκB (IκB) kinase) complex to TNFR1. TRAF2 interacts with IKKβ and IKKα, and also promotes the K63-linked polyubiquitination of RIP1 (Ub, ubiquitin); Ubiquitinated RIP1 binds to IKKγ. TRAF2 also recruits TAK1 (TGFβ-activated kinase 1) to TNFR1 via an interaction with TAB1 (TAK1 binding protein 1), which may result in activation of TAK1. This also brings TAK1 into close proximity of the IKK complex. TAK1 may activate IKKβ either by phosphorylating it directly, or by activating NIK (NFκB-inducing kinase), which then phosphorylates IKKβ. Active IKKβ phosphorylates IκBα on conserved serines, leading to its polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. This liberates the bound NFκB dimers (e.g. the prototypical p65/p50 heterodimer), which translocate into the nucleus to mediate transcriptional effects. MAPK activation: TNF-α activates various MAPKs in adipocytes, including ERK1/2, p38 MAPK and JNK, possibly via the adapter MADD. ERK1/2 and JNK can each regulate transcription by suppressing the activity of PPARγ. JNK may also exert transcriptional effects via c-jun. JNK, ERK1/2, IKKβ and other kinases have also been implicated in TNF-α-induced serine phosphorylation of IRS-1, which suppresses insulin signalling. Other effects: TNF-α can activate PKA (protein kinase A) by increasing cAMP levels, possibly via transcriptional effects. TNF-α can activate the transcription factor NFAT via Ca2+, however this has not been established in adipocytes. In preadipocytes TNF-α can stimulate transcription by TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2). The transcriptional effects of TNF-α promote ER stress, oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, lipolysis and altered adipokine expression, thereby compromising insulin signalling and adipocyte lipid metabolism. TNFR2 may also mediate some effects of TNF-α in adipose tissue, albeit by unknown mechanisms. Factors that have not been directly established in TNF-α-induced signals in adipocytes are faded. Dashed lines indicate effects that are mediated by indirect or unestablished mechanisms. Question marks indicate effects that remain to be fully established. Genes written in red or green are upregulated or downregulated by TNF-α, respectively.

Fig. 2 Mechanisms of TNF-α-induced insulin resistance in adipose tissue
Insulin mediates metabolic effects by binding to the insulin receptor (IR). The IR has intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, and insulin binding promotes autophosphorylation of the IR on key intracellular tyrosines. This allows the recruitment of insulin receptor substrates (IRS) such as IRS-1. IR-bound IRS proteins are themselves phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, allowing the activation of signalling pathways such as phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and AKT. These exert downstream effects such as translocation of GLUT4 from intracellular storage vesicles to the plasma membrane. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) can abrogate IR-proximal signalling. TNF-α also impairs IR-proximal signalling through the activation of IRS serine kinases and the production of toxic lipids, as described in Figure 1. TNF-α further compromises insulin action through transcriptional effects, possibly mediated via NFκB activation. These cause downregulation of components required for insulin responsiveness and upregulation of factors that may further impair both local and systemic insulin sensitivity, such as SOCS-3. Transcriptional effects may also promote cellular stresses that can impair insulin signalling. Thiazolidinediones (TZD) impair TNF-α-induced insulin resistance. Black arrows indicate effects that promote insulin signalling. Red arrows indicate effects that antagonise insulin signalling. Effects on gene expression are indicated as described in Fig. 1.

Fig. 3 Effects of TNF-α on adipocyte lipid metabolism and lipolysis
(A) Pathways involved in adipocyte lipogenesis and their modulation by TNF-α. Adipocytes take up glucose, glycerol and FFA from serum and convert these to triglycerides via numerous biochemical pathways. White boxes indicate the nature of the pathways involved. TNF-α modulates the expression of many of the enzymes and other proteins that regulate these pathways, thereby compromising adipocyte triglyceride storage. (B) Mechanisms of TNF-α-induced lipolysis in adipocytes. During lipolysis triglycerides are hydrolysed into FFA and glycerol. Stimulus-induced lipolysis is mediated by hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL), whereas basal lipolysis may be regulated by adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL). Lipolysis is further regulated by the perilipins, a family of phosphoproteins that are localised at the surface of lipid droplets in adipocytes. Perilipins normally inhibit lipolysis by preventing access of lipases to the lipid droplets. PKA stimulates lipolysis by phosphorylating HSL and the perilipins. This activates HSL and enables it to access substrates in the lipid droplets. Downregulation of cAMP by phosphodiesterases (PDE) or stimulation of Giα-coupled receptors abrogates PKA activation and thereby inhibits lipolysis. TNF-α stimulates lipolysis via a glucose-dependent mechanism that likely involves transcriptional effects. These may be mediated via JNK, ERK1/2 and NFκB, resulting in upregulation of cAMP and downregulation of perilipins. Some of these effects, such as downregulation of Giα subtypes, are specific to rodent adipocytes. Arrows and gene names in red and green indicate upregulation and downregulation, respectively. PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; FAS, fatty acid synthase; FABP, fatty acid-binding protein; FAT, fatty acid translocase; ACS, aceyl-CoA synthetase long chain; DGAT1, diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1; AQP7, aquaporin 7; GK, glycerol kinase; G3PDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; PFK, phosphofructokinase; PGK, phosphoglycerate kinase; PK, pyruvate kinase; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; TCA, tri-carboxylic acid; CPT1 carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1; OXA, oxaloacetate; PEP, phosphoenol pyruvate; TG, triglyceride; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.


   References
[1] 
            Kriegler M  
            Perez C  
            DeFay K  
            Albert I  
            Lu SD  
           A novel form of TNF/cachectin is a cell surface cytotoxic transmembrane protein: ramifications for the complex physiology of TNF Cell 1988 53 45 53 3349526 
[2] 
            Black RA  
             
           A metalloproteinase disintegrin that releases tumour-necrosis factor-alpha from cells Nature 1997 385 729 733 9034190 
[3] 
            Perez C  
            Albert I  
            DeFay K  
            Zachariades N  
            Gooding L  
            Kriegler M  
           A nonsecretable cell surface mutant of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) kills by cell-to-cell contact Cell 1990 63 251 258 2208285 
[4] 
            Xu H  
            Sethi JK  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Transmembrane tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibits adipocyte differentiation by selectively activating TNF receptor 1 J. Biol. Chem 1999 274 26287 26295 10473584 
[5] 
            Grell M  
           Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors in cellular signaling of soluble and membrane-expressed TNF J. Inflamm 1995 47 8 17 8913925 
[6] 
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Shargill NS  
            Spiegelman BM  
           Adipose expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance Science 1993 259 87 91 7678183 
[7] 
            Xu H  
            Uysal KT  
            Becherer JD  
            Arner P  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Altered tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) processing in adipocytes and increased expression of transmembrane TNF-alpha in obesity Diabetes 2002 51 1876 1883 12031976 
[8] 
            Zahorska-Markiewicz B  
            Janowska J  
            Olszanecka-Glinianowicz M  
            Zurakowski A  
           Serum concentrations of TNF-alpha and soluble TNF-alpha receptors in obesity Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord 2000 24 1392 1395 11126333 
[9] 
            Togashi N  
            Ura N  
            Higashiura K  
            Murakami H  
            Shimamoto K  
           Effect of TNF-alpha-converting enzyme inhibitor on insulin resistance in fructose-fed rats Hypertension 2002 39 578 580 11882611 
[10] 
            Serino M  
             
           Mice heterozygous for tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting enzyme are protected from obesity-induced insulin resistance and diabetes Diabetes 2007 56 2541 2546 17646208 
[11] 
            Weisberg S  
            McCann D  
            Desai M  
            Rosenbaum M  
            Leibel RL  
            Ferrante AW Jr  
           Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue J. Clin. Invest 2003 112 1796 1808 14679176 
[12] 
            Stephens JM  
            Pekala PH  
           Transcriptional repression of the GLUT4 and C/EBP genes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes by tumor necrosis factor-alpha J. Biol. Chem 1991 266 21839 21845 1939208 
[13] 
            Kawakami M  
            Murase T  
            Ogawa H  
            Ishibashi S  
            Mori N  
            Takaku F  
            Shibata S  
           Human recombinant TNF suppresses lipoprotein lipase activity and stimulates lipolysis in 3T3-L1 cells J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 1987 101 331 338 3495531 
[14] 
            Beutler B  
            Greenwald D  
            Hulmes JD  
            Chang M  
            Pan YC  
            Mathison J  
            Ulevitch R  
            Cerami A  
           Identity of tumour necrosis factor and the macrophage-secreted factor cachectin Nature 1985 316 552 554 2993897 
[15] 
            Torti FM  
            Dieckmann B  
            Beutler B  
            Cerami A  
            Ringold GM  
           A macrophage factor inhibits adipocyte gene expression: an in vitro model of cachexia Science 1985 229 867 869 3839597 
[16] 
            Ventre J  
            Doebber T  
            Wu M  
            MacNaul K  
            Stevens K  
            Pasparakis M  
            Kollias G  
            Moller DE  
           Targeted disruption of the tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene: metabolic consequences in obese and nonobese mice Diabetes 1997 46 1526 1531 9287059 
[17] 
            Uysal KT  
            Wiesbrock SM  
            Marino MW  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Protection from obesity-induced insulin resistance in mice lacking TNF-[alpha] function Nature 1997 389 610 614 9335502 
[18] 
            Ofei F  
            Hurel S  
            Newkirk J  
            Sopwith M  
            Taylor R  
           Effects of an engineered human anti-TNF-alpha antibody (CDP571) on insulin sensitivity and glycemic control in patients with NIDDM Diabetes 1996 45 881 885 8666137 
[19] 
            Di Rocco P  
            Manco M  
            Rosa G  
            Greco AV  
            Mingrone G  
           Lowered tumor necrosis factor receptors, but not increased insulin sensitivity, with infliximab Obes. Res 2004 12 734 739 15090644 
[20] 
            Paquot N  
            Castillo MJ  
            Lefebvre PJ  
            Scheen AJ  
           No increased insulin sensitivity after a single intravenous administration of a recombinant human tumor necrosis factor receptor: Fc fusion protein in obese insulin-resistant patients J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 2000 85 1316 1319 10720082 
[21] 
            Dominguez H  
             
           Metabolic and vascular effects of tumor necrosis factor-alpha blockade with etanercept in obese patients with type 2 diabetes J. Vasc. Res 2005 42 517 525 16155368 
[22] 
            Kiortsis DN  
            Mavridis AK  
            Vasakos S  
            Nikas SN  
            Drosos AA  
           Effects of infliximab treatment on insulin resistance in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis Ann. Rheum. Dis 2005 64 765 766 15458960 
[23] 
            Tam LS  
            Tomlinson B  
            Chu TT  
            Li TK  
            Li EK  
           Impact of TNF inhibition on insulin resistance and lipids levels in patients with rheumatoid arthritis Clin. Rheumatol 2007 26 1495 1498 17237906 
[24] 
            Huvers FC  
            Popa C  
            Netea MG  
            van den Hoogen FH  
            Tack CJ  
           Improved insulin sensitivity by anti-TNF{alpha} antibody treatment in patients with rheumatic diseases Ann. Rheum. Dis 2007 66 558 559 17360784 
[25] 
            Yazdani-Biuki B  
            Stelzl H  
            Brezinschek HP  
            Hermann J  
            Mueller T  
            Krippl P  
            Graninger W  
            Wascher TC  
           Improvement of insulin sensitivity in insulin resistant subjects during prolonged treatment with the anti-TNF-alpha antibody infliximab Eur. J. Clin. Invest 2004 34 641 642 15379764 
[26] 
            Ross S  
            Erickson RL  
            Gerin I  
            DeRose PM  
            Bajnok L  
            Longo KA  
            Misek DE  
            Kuick R  
            Hanash SM  
            Atkins KB  
            Andresen SM  
            Nebb HI  
            Madsen L  
            Kristiansen K  
            MacDougald OA  
           Microarray analyses during adipogenesis: understanding the effects of Wnt signaling on adipogenesis and the roles of liver X receptor alpha in adipocyte metabolism Mol. Cell Biol 2002 22 5989 5999 12138207 
[27] 
            Xu H  
            Barnes GT  
            Yang Q  
            Tan G  
            Yang D  
            Chou CJ  
            Sole J  
            Nichols A  
            Ross JS  
            Tartaglia LA  
            Chen H  
           Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related insulin resistance J. Clin. Invest 2003 112 1821 1830 14679177 
[28] 
            Fain JN  
            Bahouth SW  
            Madan AK  
           TNFalpha release by the nonfat cells of human adipose tissue Int. J. Obes. Relat. Metab. Disord 2004 28 616 622 14770194 
[29] 
            Lumeng CN  
            Bodzin JL  
            Saltiel AR  
           Obesity induces a phenotypic switch in adipose tissue macrophage polarization J. Clin. Invest 2007 117 175 184 17200717 
[30] 
            Coenen KR  
            Gruen ML  
            Chait A  
            Hasty AH  
           Diet-induced increases in adiposity, but not plasma lipids, promote macrophage infiltration into white adipose tissue Diabetes 2007 56 564 573 17327423 
[31] 
            De Taeye BM  
            Novitskaya T  
            McGuinness OP  
            Gleaves L  
            Medda M  
            Covington JW  
            Vaughan DE  
           Macrophage TNF-alpha contributes to insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis in diet-induced obesity Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 2007 293 E713 E725 17578885 
[32] 
            Nisoli E  
            Briscini L  
            Tonello C  
            De Giuli-Morghen C  
            Carruba MO  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces apoptosis in rat brown adipocytes Cell Death Differ 1997 4 771 778 16465289 
[33] 
            Strissel KJ  
            Stancheva Z  
            Miyoshi H  
            Perfield JW 2nd  
            Defuria J  
            Jick Z  
            Greenberg AS  
            Obin MS  
           Adipocyte death, adipose tissue remodeling and obesity complications Diabetes 2007 Epub ahead of print 
[34] 
            Cinti S  
             
           Adipocyte death defines macrophage localization and function in adipose tissue of obese mice and humans J. Lipid Res 2005 46 2347 2355 16150820 
[35] 
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Inflammation and metabolic disorders Nature 2006 444 860 867 17167474 
[36] 
            Kelley DS  
           Modulation of human immune and inflammatory responses by dietary fatty acids Nutrition 2001 17 669 673 11448594 
[37] 
            Ugochukwu NH  
            Figgers CL  
           Caloric restriction inhibits up-regulation of inflammatory cytokines and TNF-alpha, and activates IL-10 and haptoglobin in the plasma of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats J. Nutr. Biochem 2007 18 120 126 16713232 
[38] 
            McTernan PG  
             
           Insulin and rosiglitazone regulation of lipolysis and lipogenesis in human adipose tissue in vitro Diabetes 2002 51 1493 1498 11978647 
[39] 
            Gatanaga T  
             
           Purification and characterization of an inhibitor (soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor) for tumor necrosis factor and lymphotoxin obtained from the serum ultrafiltrates of human cancer patients Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1990 87 8781 8784 2174164 
[40] 
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Arner P  
            Atkinson RL  
            Spiegelman BM  
           Differential regulation of the p80 tumor necrosis factor receptor in human obesity and insulin resistance Diabetes 1997 46 451 455 9032102 
[41] 
            Mohamed-Ali V  
            Goodrick S  
            Bulmer K  
            Holly JM  
            Yudkin JS  
            Coppack SW  
           Production of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptors by human subcutaneous adipose tissue in vivo Am. J. Physiol 1999 277 E971 E975 10600783 
[42] 
            MacEwan DJ  
           TNF receptor subtype signalling: differences and cellular consequences Cell Signal 2002 14 477 492 11897488 
[43] 
            Peraldi P  
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Buurman WA  
            White MF  
            Spiegelman BM  
           Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibits insulin signaling through stimulation of the p55 TNF receptor and activation of sphingomyelinase J. Biol. Chem 1996 271 13018 13022 8662983 
[44] 
            Lewis M  
            Tartaglia LA  
            Lee A  
            Bennett GL  
            Rice GC  
            Wong GH  
            Chen EY  
            Goeddel DV  
           Cloning and expression of cDNAs for two distinct murine tumor necrosis factor receptors demonstrate one receptor is species specific Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1991 88 2830 2834 1849278 
[45] 
            Uysal KT  
            Wiesbrock SM  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Functional analysis of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors in TNF-alpha-mediated insulin resistance in genetic obesity Endocrinology 1998 139 4832 4838 9832419 
[46] 
            Sethi JK  
            Xu H  
            Uysal KT  
            Wiesbrock SM  
            Scheja L  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Characterisation of receptor-specific TNFalpha functions in adipocyte cell lines lacking type 1 and 2 TNF receptors FEBS Lett 2000 469 77 82 10708760 
[47] 
            Cawthorn WP  
            Heyd F  
            Hegyi K  
            Sethi JK  
           Tumour necrosis factor-alpha inhibits adipogenesis via a beta-catenin/TCF4(TCF7L2)-dependent pathway Cell Death Differ 2007 14 1361 1373 17464333 
[48] 
            Liu LS  
            Spelleken M  
            Rohrig K  
            Hauner H  
            Eckel J  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha acutely inhibits insulin signaling in human adipocytes: implication of the p80 tumor necrosis factor receptor Diabetes 1998 47 515 522 9568681 
[49] 
            Good M  
            Newell FM  
            Haupt LM  
            Whitehead JP  
            Hutley LJ  
            Prins JB  
           TNF and TNF receptor expression and insulin sensitivity in human omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue-influence of BMI and adipose distribution Diab. Vasc. Dis. Res 2006 3 26 33 16784178 
[50] 
            Pandey M  
            Tuncman G  
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Samad F  
           Divergent roles for p55 and p75 TNF-alpha receptors in the induction of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 Am. J. Pathol 2003 162 933 941 12598326 
[51] 
            Csehi SB  
            Mathieu S  
            Seifert U  
            Lange A  
            Zweyer M  
            Wernig A  
            Adam D  
           Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) interferes with insulin signaling through the p55 TNF receptor death domain Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2005 329 397 405 15721320 
[52] 
            Prins JB  
            Niesler CU  
            Winterford CM  
            Bright NA  
            Siddle K  
            O’Rahilly S  
            Walker NI  
            Cameron DP  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces apoptosis of human adipose cells Diabetes 1997 46 1939 1944 9392477 
[53] 
            Nisoli E  
             
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha mediates apoptosis of brown adipocytes and defective brown adipocytefunction in obesity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2000 97 8033 8038 10884431 
[54] 
            Jain RG  
            Phelps KD  
            Pekala PH  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha initiated signal transduction in 3T3-L1 adipocytes J. Cell Physiol 1999 179 58 66 10082133 
[55] 
            Ryden M  
            Dicker A  
            van Harmelen V  
            Hauner H  
            Brunnberg M  
            Perbeck L  
            Lonnqvist F  
            Arner P  
           Mapping of early signaling events in tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated lipolysis in human fat cells J. Biol. Chem 2002 277 1085 1091 11694522 
[56] 
            Chae GN  
            Kwak SJ  
           NF-kappaB is involved in the TNF-alpha induced inhibition of the differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells by reducing PPARgamma expression Exp. Mol. Med 2003 35 431 437 14646597 
[57] 
            Suzawa M  
             
           Cytokines suppress adipogenesis and PPAR-gamma function through the TAK1/TAB1/NIK cascade Nat. Cell Biol 2003 5 224 230 12598905 
[58] 
            Kim KY  
            Kim JK  
            Jeon JH  
            Yoon SR  
            Choi I  
            Yang Y  
           c-Jun N-terminal kinase is involved in the suppression of adiponectin expression by TNF-alpha in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2005 327 460 467 15629137 
[59] 
            Abel ED  
             
           Adipose-selective targeting of the GLUT4 gene impairs insulin action in muscle and liver Nature 2001 409 729 733 11217863 
[60] 
            Ruan H  
            Lodish HF  
           Insulin resistance in adipose tissue: direct and indirect effects of tumor necrosis factor-alpha Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2003 14 447 455 12948526 
[61] 
            Stephens JM  
            Lee J  
            Pilch PF  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes is accompanied by a loss of insulin receptor substrate-1 and GLUT4 expression without a loss of insulin receptor-mediated signal transduction J. Biol. Chem 1997 272 971 976 8995390 
[62] 
            Ruan H  
            Miles PD  
            Ladd CM  
            Ross K  
            Golub TR  
            Olefsky JM  
            Lodish HF  
           Profiling gene transcription in vivo reveals adipose tissue as an immediate target of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: implications for insulin resistance Diabetes 2002 51 3176 3188 12401708 
[63] 
            Ruan H  
            Hacohen N  
            Golub TR  
            Van Parijs L  
            Lodish HF  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha suppresses adipocyte-specific genes and activates expression of preadipocyte genes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes: nuclear factor-kappaB activation by TNF-alpha is obligatory Diabetes 2002 51 1319 1336 11978627 
[64] 
            Miles PD  
            Romeo OM  
            Higo K  
            Cohen A  
            Rafaat K  
            Olefsky JM  
           TNF-alpha-induced insulin resistance in vivo and its prevention by troglitazone Diabetes 1997 46 1678 1683 9356012 
[65] 
            Peraldi P  
            Xu M  
            Spiegelman BM  
           Thiazolidinediones block tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced inhibition of insulin signaling J. Clin. Invest 1997 100 1863 1869 9312188 
[66] 
            Ruan H  
            Pownall HJ  
            Lodish HF  
           Troglitazone antagonizes tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced reprogramming of adipocyte gene expression by inhibiting the transcriptional regulatory functions of NF-kappaB J. Biol. Chem 2003 278 28181 28192 12732648 
[67] 
            Hu E  
            Kim JB  
            Sarraf P  
            Spiegelman BM  
           Inhibition of adipogenesis through MAP kinase-mediated phosphorylation of PPARgamma Science 1996 274 2100 2103 8953045 
[68] 
            Adams M  
            Reginato MJ  
            Shao D  
            Lazar MA  
            Chatterjee VK  
           Transcriptional activation by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma is inhibited by phosphorylation at a consensus mitogen-activated protein kinase site J. Biol. Chem 1997 272 5128 5132 9030579 
[69] 
            Sung CK  
            She H  
            Xiong S  
            Tsukamoto H  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha inhibits peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma activity at a posttranslational level in hepatic stellate cells Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol 2004 286 G722 G729 14656714 
[70] 
            Iwata M  
             
           Pioglitazone ameliorates tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced insulin resistance by a mechanism independent of adipogenic activity of peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor-gamma Diabetes 2001 50 1083 1092 11334412 
[71] 
            Rangwala SM  
            Rhoades B  
            Shapiro JS  
            Rich AS  
            Kim JK  
            Shulman GI  
            Kaestner KH  
            Lazar MA  
           Genetic modulation of PPARgamma phosphorylation regulates insulin sensitivity Dev. Cell 2003 5 657 663 14536066 
[72] 
            Tang X  
             
           An RNA interference-based screen identifies MAP4K4/NIK as a negative regulator of PPARgamma, adipogenesis, and insulin-responsive hexose transport Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2006 103 2087 2092 16461467 
[73] 
            Tesz GJ  
            Guilherme A  
            Guntur KV  
            Hubbard AC  
            Tang X  
            Chawla A  
            Czech MP  
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) stimulates Map4k4 expression through TNF-alpha receptor 1 signaling to c-Jun and activating transcription factor 2 J. Biol. Chem 2007 282 19302 19312 17500068 
[74] 
            Yuan M  
            Konstantopoulos N  
            Lee J  
            Hansen L  
            Li ZW  
            Karin M  
            Shoelson SE  
           Reversal of obesity- and diet-induced insulin resistance with salicylates or targeted disruption of Ikkbeta Science 2001 293 1673 1677 11533494 
[75] 
            Cai D  
            Yuan M  
            Frantz DF  
            Melendez PA  
            Hansen L  
            Lee J  
            Shoelson SE  
           Local and systemic insulin resistance resulting from hepatic activation of IKK-beta and NF-kappaB Nat. Med 2005 11 183 190 15685173 
[76] 
            Arkan MC  
             
           IKK-beta links inflammation to obesity-induced insulin resistance Nat. Med 2005 11 191 198 15685170 
[77] 
            Peraldi P  
            Filloux C  
            Emanuelli B  
            Hilton DJ  
            Van Obberghen E  
           Insulin induces suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 tyrosine phosphorylation through janus-activated kinase J. Biol. Chem 2001 276 24614 24620 11325969 
[78] 
            Emanuelli B  
            Peraldi P  
            Filloux C  
            Chavey C  
            Freidinger K  
            Hilton DJ  
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Van Obberghen E  
           SOCS-3 inhibits insulin signaling and is up-regulated in response to tumor necrosis factor-alpha in the adipose tissue of obese mice J. Biol. Chem 2001 276 47944 47949 11604392 
[79] 
            Ueki K  
            Kondo T  
            Kahn CR  
           Suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS-1) and SOCS-3 cause insulin resistance through inhibition of tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate proteins by discrete mechanisms Mol. Cell Biol 2004 24 5434 5446 15169905 
[80] 
            Shi H  
            Cave B  
            Inouye K  
            Bjorbaek C  
            Flier JS  
           Overexpression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 in adipose tissue causes local but not systemic insulin resistance Diabetes 2006 55 699 707 16505233 
[81] 
            Steinberg GR  
             
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced skeletal muscle insulin resistance involves suppression of AMP-kinase signaling Cell Metab 2006 4 465 474 17141630 
[82] 
            Ren T  
            He J  
            Jiang H  
            Zu L  
            Pu S  
            Guo X  
            Xu G  
           Metformin reduces lipolysis in primary rat adipocytes stimulated by tumor necrosis factor-alpha or isoproterenol J. Mol. Endocrinol 2006 37 175 183 16901933 
[83] 
            Engelman JA  
            Berg AH  
            Lewis RY  
            Lisanti MP  
            Scherer PE  
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha-mediated insulin resistance, but not dedifferentiation, is abrogated by MEK1/2 inhibitors in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Mol. Endocrinol 2000 14 1557 1569 11043572 
[84] 
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Peraldi P  
            Budavari A  
            Ellis R  
            White MF  
            Spiegelman BM  
           IRS-1-mediated inhibition of insulin receptor tyrosine kinase activity in TNF-alpha- and obesity-induced insulin resistance Science 1996 271 665 668 8571133 
[85] 
            Zick Y  
           Ser/Thr phosphorylation of IRS proteins: a molecular basis for insulin resistance Sci. STKE 2005 pe4 15671481 
[86] 
            Rui L  
            Aguirre V  
            Kim JK  
            Shulman GI  
            Lee A  
            Corbould A  
            Dunaif A  
            White MF  
           Insulin/IGF-1 and TNF-alpha stimulate phosphorylation of IRS-1 at inhibitory Ser307 via distinct pathways J. Clin. Invest 2001 107 181 189 11160134 
[87] 
            Gao Z  
            Zuberi A  
            Quon MJ  
            Dong Z  
            Ye J  
           Aspirin inhibits serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 in tumor necrosis factor-treated cells through targeting multiple serine kinases J. Biol. Chem 2003 278 24944 24950 12714600 
[88] 
            Hirosumi J  
            Tuncman G  
            Chang L  
            Gorgun CZ  
            Uysal KT  
            Maeda K  
            Karin M  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           A central role for JNK in obesity and insulin resistance Nature 2002 420 333 336 12447443 
[89] 
            Aguirre V  
            Uchida T  
            Yenush L  
            Davis R  
            White MF  
           The c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase promotes insulin resistance during association with insulin receptor substrate-1 and phosphorylation of Ser(307) J. Biol. Chem 2000 275 9047 9054 10722755 
[90] 
            Gao Z  
            Hwang D  
            Bataille F  
            Lefevre M  
            York D  
            Quon MJ  
            Ye J  
           Serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 by inhibitor kappa B kinase complex J. Biol. Chem 2002 277 48115 48121 12351658 
[91] 
            Ozes ON  
            Akca H  
            Mayo LD  
            Gustin JA  
            Maehama T  
            Dixon JE  
            Donner DB  
           A phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/mTOR pathway mediates and PTEN antagonizes tumor necrosis factor inhibition of insulin signaling through insulin receptor substrate-1 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2001 98 4640 4645 11287630 
[92] 
            Kim JA  
             
           Phosphorylation of Ser24 in the pleckstrin homology domain of insulin receptor substrate-1 by Mouse Pelle-like kinase/interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase: cross-talk between inflammatory signaling and insulin signaling that may contribute to insulin resistance J. Biol. Chem 2005 280 23173 23183 15849359 
[93] 
            Nawaratne R  
            Gray A  
            Jorgensen CH  
            Downes CP  
            Siddle K  
            Sethi JK  
           Regulation of insulin receptor substrate 1 pleckstrin homology domain by protein kinase C: role of serine 24 phosphorylation Mol. Endocrinol 2006 20 1838 1852 16574739 
[94] 
            Grigsby RJ  
            Dobrowsky RT  
           Inhibition of ceramide production reverses TNF-induced insulin resistance Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2001 287 1121 1124 11587538 
[95] 
            Fernandez-Veledo S  
            Hernandez R  
            Teruel T  
            Mas JA  
            Ros M  
            Lorenzo M  
           Ceramide mediates TNF-alpha-induced insulin resistance on GLUT4 gene expression in brown adipocytes Arch. Physiol. Biochem 2006 112 13 22 16754199 
[96] 
            Long SD  
            Pekala PH  
           Lipid mediators of insulin resistance: ceramide signalling down-regulates GLUT4 gene transcription in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Biochem. J 1996 319 Pt 1 179 184 8870666 
[97] 
            Teruel T  
            Hernandez R  
            Lorenzo M  
           Ceramide mediates insulin resistance by tumor necrosis factor-alpha in brown adipocytes by maintaining Akt in an inactive dephosphorylated state Diabetes 2001 50 2563 2571 11679435 
[98] 
            Holland WL  
             
           Inhibition of ceramide synthesis ameliorates glucocorticoid-, saturated-fat-, and obesity-induced insulin resistance Cell Metab 2007 5 167 179 17339025 
[99] 
            Tagami S  
             
           Ganglioside GM3 participates in the pathological conditions of insulin resistance J. Biol. Chem 2002 277 3085 3092 11707432 
[100] 
            Aerts JM  
             
           Pharmacological inhibition of glucosylceramide synthase enhances insulin sensitivity Diabetes 2007 56 1341 1349 17287460 
[101] 
            Gloire G  
            Legrand-Poels S  
            Piette J  
           NF-kappaB activation by reactive oxygen species: fifteen years later Biochem. Pharmacol 2006 72 1493 1505 16723122 
[102] 
            Houstis N  
            Rosen ED  
            Lander ES  
           Reactive oxygen species have a causal role in multiple forms of insulin resistance Nature 2006 440 944 948 16612386 
[103] 
            Esposito K  
             
           Inflammatory cytokine concentrations are acutely increased by hyperglycemia in humans: role of oxidative stress Circulation 2002 106 2067 2072 12379575 
[104] 
            Dahlman I  
            Forsgren M  
            Sjogren A  
            Nordstrom EA  
            Kaaman M  
            Naslund E  
            Attersand A  
            Arner P  
           Downregulation of electron transport chain genes in visceral adipose tissue in type 2 diabetes independent of obesity and possibly involving tumor necrosis factor-alpha Diabetes 2006 55 1792 1799 16731844 
[105] 
            Sethi JK  
            Vidal-Puig AJ  
           Thematic review series: adipocyte biology. Adipose tissue function and plasticity orchestrate nutritional adaptation J. Lipid Res 2007 48 1253 1262 17374880 
[106] 
            Yamauchi T  
             
           Adiponectin stimulates glucose utilization and fatty-acid oxidation by activating AMP-activated protein kinase Nat. Med 2002 8 1288 1295 12368907 
[107] 
            Yamauchi T  
             
           Globular adiponectin protected ob/ ob mice from diabetes and ApoE-deficient mice from atherosclerosis J. Biol. Chem 2003 278 2461 2468 12431986 
[108] 
            Kubota N  
             
           Disruption of adiponectin causes insulin resistance and neointimal formation J. Biol. Chem 2002 277 25863 25866 12032136 
[109] 
            Fasshauer M  
            Klein J  
            Neumann S  
            Eszlinger M  
            Paschke R  
           Hormonal regulation of adiponectin gene expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2002 290 1084 1089 11798186 
[110] 
            Degawa-Yamauchi M  
             
           Regulation of adiponectin expression in human adipocytes: effects of adiposity, glucocorticoids, and tumor necrosis factor alpha Obes. Res 2005 13 662 669 15897474 
[111] 
            Kappes A  
            Loffler G  
           Influences of ionomycin, dibutyryl-cycloAMP and tumour necrosis factor-alpha on intracellular amount and secretion of apM1 in differentiating primary human preadipocytes Horm. Metab. Res 2000 32 548 554 11246823 
[112] 
            Bruun JM  
            Lihn AS  
            Verdich C  
            Pedersen SB  
            Toubro S  
            Astrup A  
            Richelsen B  
           Regulation of adiponectin by adipose tissue-derived cytokines: in vivo and in vitro investigations in humans Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 2003 285 E527 E533 12736161 
[113] 
            Kern PA  
            Di Gregorio GB  
            Lu T  
            Rassouli N  
            Ranganathan G  
           Adiponectin expression from human adipose tissue: relation to obesity, insulin resistance, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression Diabetes 2003 52 1779 1785 12829646 
[114] 
            Matsuzawa Y  
           Adiponectin: identification, physiology and clinical relevance in metabolic and vascular disease Atheroscler. Suppl 2005 6 7 14 15823491 
[115] 
            Kita A  
             
           Identification of the promoter region required for human adiponectin gene transcription: Association with CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2005 331 484 490 15850785 
[116] 
            Kirchgessner TG  
            Uysal KT  
            Wiesbrock SM  
            Marino MW  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha contributes to obesity-related hyperleptinemia by regulating leptin release from adipocytes J. Clin. Invest 1997 100 2777 2782 9389742 
[117] 
            Finck BN  
            Johnson RW  
           Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha induces leptin production through the p55 TNF receptor Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol 2000 278 R537 R543 10666158 
[118] 
            Katsuki A  
             
           Serum levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha are increased in obese patients with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 1998 83 859 862 9506740 
[119] 
            Pfeiffer A  
            Janott J  
            Mohlig M  
            Ristow M  
            Rochlitz H  
            Busch K  
            Schatz H  
            Schifferdecker E  
           Circulating tumor necrosis factor alpha is elevated in male but not in female patients with type II diabetes mellitus Horm. Metab. Res 1997 29 111 114 9137980 
[120] 
            Grunfeld C  
            Zhao C  
            Fuller J  
            Pollack A  
            Moser A  
            Friedman J  
            Feingold KR  
           Endotoxin and cytokines induce expression of leptin, the ob gene product, in hamsters J. Clin. Invest 1996 97 2152 2157 8621806 
[121] 
            Trujillo ME  
            Lee MJ  
            Sullivan S  
            Feng J  
            Schneider SH  
            Greenberg AS  
            Fried SK  
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha and glucocorticoid synergistically increase leptin production in human adipose tissue: role for p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab 2006 91 1484 1490 16403817 
[122] 
            Fukuhara A  
             
           Visfatin: a protein secreted by visceral fat that mimics the effects of insulin Science 2005 307 426 430 15604363 
[123] 
            Sethi JK  
           Is PBEF/Visfatin/Nampt an authentic adipokine relevant to the metabolic syndrome? Curr. Hypertens. Rep 2007 9 33 38 17362669 
[124] 
            Kralisch S  
            Klein J  
            Lossner U  
            Bluher M  
            Paschke R  
            Stumvoll M  
            Fasshauer M  
           Hormonal regulation of the novel adipocytokine visfatin in 3T3-L1 adipocytes J. Endocrinol 2005 185 R1 R8 15930160 
[125] 
            Hector J  
             
           TNF-alpha alters visfatin and adiponectin levels in human fat Horm. Metab. Res 2007 39 250 255 17447161 
[126] 
            Steppan CM  
             
           The hormone resistin links obesity to diabetes Nature 2001 409 307 312 11201732 
[127] 
            Tilg H  
            Moschen AR  
           Adipocytokines: mediators linking adipose tissue, inflammation and immunity Nat. Rev. Immunol 2006 6 772 783 16998510 
[128] 
            Fasshauer M  
            Klein J  
            Neumann S  
            Eszlinger M  
            Paschke R  
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha is a negative regulator of resistin gene expression and secretion in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2001 288 1027 1031 11689013 
[129] 
            Kaser S  
            Kaser A  
            Sandhofer A  
            Ebenbichler CF  
            Tilg H  
            Patsch JR  
           Resistin messenger-RNA expression is increased by proinflammatory cytokines in vitro Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2003 309 286 290 12951047 
[130] 
            Nagaev I  
            Bokarewa M  
            Tarkowski A  
            Smith U  
           Human Resistin Is a Systemic Immune-Derived Proinflammatory Cytokine Targeting both Leukocytes and Adipocytes PLoS ONE 2006 1 e31 17183659 
[131] 
            Ma LJ  
             
           Prevention of obesity and insulin resistance in mice lacking plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 Diabetes 2004 53 336 346 14747283 
[132] 
            Araki S  
            Dobashi K  
            Kubo K  
            Yamamoto Y  
            Asayama K  
            Shirahata A  
           N -acetylcysteine attenuates TNF-alpha induced changes in secretion of interleukin-6, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and adiponectin from 3T3-L1 adipocytes Life Sci 2006 79 2405 2412 16952378 
[133] 
            Pandey M  
            Loskutoff DJ  
            Samad F  
           Molecular mechanisms of tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 expression in adipocytes Faseb J 2005 19 1317 1319 15928193 
[134] 
            Samad F  
            Yamamoto K  
            Loskutoff DJ  
           Distribution and regulation of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in murine adipose tissue in vivo. Induction by tumor necrosis factor-alpha and lipopolysaccharide J. Clin. Invest 1996 97 37 46 8550848 
[135] 
            Samad F  
            Uysal KT  
            Wiesbrock SM  
            Pandey M  
            Hotamisligil GS  
            Loskutoff DJ  
           Tumor necrosis factor alpha is a key component in the obesity-linked elevation of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1999 96 6902 6907 10359811 
[136] 
            Ramsay TG  
           Fat cells Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. North Am 1996 25 847 870 8977049 
[137] 
            Memon RA  
            Feingold KR  
            Moser AH  
            Fuller J  
            Grunfeld C  
           Regulation of fatty acid transport protein and fatty acid translocase mRNA levels by endotoxin and cytokines Am. J. Physiol 1998 274 E210 E217 9486149 
[138] 
            Lopez-Soriano J  
            Llovera M  
            Carbo N  
            Garcia-Martinez C  
            Lopez-Soriano FJ  
            Argiles JM  
           Lipid metabolism in tumour-bearing mice: studies with knockout mice for tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 protein Mol. Cell Endocrinol 1997 132 93 99 9324050 
[139] 
            Fried SK  
            Zechner R  
           Cachectin/tumor necrosis factor decreases human adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase mRNA levels, synthesis, and activity J. Lipid Res 1989 30 1917 1923 2695592 
[140] 
            Kern PA  
           Recombinant human tumor necrosis factor does not inhibit lipoprotein lipase in primary cultures of isolated human adipocytes J. Lipid Res 1988 29 909 914 3411249 
[141] 
            Green A  
            Rumberger JM  
            Stuart CA  
            Ruhoff MS  
           Stimulation of lipolysis by tumor necrosis factor-alpha in 3T3-L1 adipocytes is glucose dependent: implications for long-term regulation of lipolysis Diabetes 2004 53 74 81 14693700 
[142] 
            Green A  
            Dobias SB  
            Walters DJ  
            Brasier AR  
           Tumor necrosis factor increases the rate of lipolysis in primary cultures of adipocytes without altering levels of hormone-sensitive lipase Endocrinology 1994 134 2581 2588 8194485 
[143] 
            Zhang HH  
            Halbleib M  
            Ahmad F  
            Manganiello VC  
            Greenberg AS  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha stimulates lipolysis in differentiated human adipocytes through activation of extracellular signal-related kinase and elevation of intracellular cAMP Diabetes 2002 51 2929 2935 12351429 
[144] 
            Zu L  
            Jiang H  
            He J  
            Xu C  
            Pu S  
            Liu M  
            Xu G  
           Salicylate Blocks Lipolytic Actions of Tumor Necrosis Factor-TNF-{alpha} in Primary Rat Adipocytes Mol. Pharmacol 2007 Epub ahead of print 
[145] 
            Kawamata Y  
            Imamura T  
            Babendure JL  
            Lu JC  
            Yoshizaki T  
            Olefsky JM  
           Tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 can function through a G alpha q/11-beta-arrestin-1 signaling complex J. Biol. Chem 2007 282 28549 28556 17664271 
[146] 
            Souza SC  
            Yamamoto MT  
            Franciosa MD  
            Lien P  
            Greenberg AS  
           BRL 49653 blocks the lipolytic actions of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: a potential new insulin-sensitizing mechanism for thiazolidinediones Diabetes 1998 47 691 695 9568706 
[147] 
            Souza S  
            Palmer HJ  
            Kang YH  
            Yamamoto MT  
            Muliro KV  
            Paulson KE  
            Greenberg AS  
           TNF-alpha induction of lipolysis is mediated through activation of the extracellular signal related kinase pathway in 3T3-L1 adipocytes J. Chem. Biol 2003 89 1077 1086 
[148] 
            Ryden M  
            Arvidsson E  
            Blomqvist L  
            Perbeck L  
            Dicker A  
            Arner P  
           Targets for TNF-alpha-induced lipolysis in human adipocytes Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2004 318 168 175 15110769 
[149] 
            Tamori Y  
            Masugi J  
            Nishino N  
            Kasuga M  
           Role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma in maintenance of the characteristics of mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes Diabetes 2002 51 2045 2055 12086932 
[150] 
            Kralisch S  
            Klein J  
            Lossner U  
            Bluher M  
            Paschke R  
            Stumvoll M  
            Fasshauer M  
           Isoproterenol, TNFalpha, and insulin downregulate adipose triglyceride lipase in 3T3-L1 adipocytes Mol. Cell Endocrinol 2005 240 43 49 16009485 
[151] 
            Hadri KE  
            Courtalon A  
            Gauthereau X  
            Chambaut-Guerin AM  
            Pairault J  
            Feve B  
           Differential regulation by tumor necrosis factor-alpha of beta1-, beta2-, and beta3-adrenoreceptor gene expression in 3T3-F442A adipocytes J. Biol. Chem 1997 272 24514 24521 9305915 
[152] 
            Rosen ED  
            MacDougald OA  
           Adipocyte differentiation from the inside out Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 2006 7 885 896 17139329 
[153] 
            Farmer SR  
           Transcriptional control of adipocyte formation Cell Metab 2006 4 263 273 17011499 
[154] 
            Ohsumi J  
            Sakakibara S  
            Yamaguchi J  
            Miyadai K  
            Yoshioka S  
            Fujiwara T  
            Horikoshi H  
            Serizawa N  
           Troglitazone prevents the inhibitory effects of inflammatory cytokines on insulin-induced adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells Endocrinology 1994 135 2279 2282 7956951 
[155] 
            Ross SE  
            Hemati N  
            Longo KA  
            Bennett CN  
            Lucas PC  
            Erickson RL  
            MacDougald OA  
           Inhibition of adipogenesis by Wnt signaling Science 2000 289 950 953 10937998 
[156] 
            Moldes M  
            Zuo Y  
            Morrison RF  
            Silva D  
            Park BH  
            Liu J  
            Farmer SR  
           Peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor gamma suppresses Wnt/beta-catenin signalling during adipogenesis Biochem. J 2003 376 607 613 12954078 
[157] 
            Freytag S  
            Geddes TJ  
           Reciprocal regulation of adipogenesis by Myc and C/EBPalpha Science 1992 256 379 382 1566086 
[158] 
            Shi Y  
            Hon M  
            Evans RM  
           The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta, an integrator of transcriptional repression and nuclear receptor signaling PNAS 2002 99 2613 2618 11867749 
[159] 
            Fu M  
             
           Cyclin D1 inhibits peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-mediated adipogenesis through histone deacetylase recruitment J. Biol. Chem 2005 280 16934 16941 15713663 
[160] 
            Ninomiya-Tsuji J  
            Torti FM  
            Ringold GM  
           Tumor necrosis factor-induced c-myc expression in the absence of mitogenesis is associated with inhibition of adipocyte differentiation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1993 90 9611 9615 8415749 
[161] 
            Grant SF  
             
           Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene confers risk of type 2 diabetes Nat. Genet 2006 38 320 323 16415884 
[162] 
            Hattersley AT  
           Prime suspect: the TCF7L2 gene and type 2 diabetes risk J. Clin. Invest 2007 117 2077 2079 17671643 
[163] 
            Cauchi S  
             
           Transcription factor TCF7L2 genetic study in the French population: expression in human beta-cells and adipose tissue and strong association with type 2 diabetes Diabetes 2006 55 2903 2908 17003360 
[164] 
            Saxena R  
             
           Common single nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF7L2 are reproducibly associated with type 2 diabetes and reduce the insulin response to glucose in nondiabetic individuals Diabetes 2006 55 2890 2895 17003358 
[165] 
            Watanabe RM  
            Allayee H  
            Xiang AH  
            Trigo E  
            Hartiala J  
            Lawrence JM  
            Buchanan TA  
           Transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) is associated with gestational diabetes mellitus and interacts with adiposity to alter insulin secretion in Mexican Americans Diabetes 2007 56 1481 1485 17317761 
[166] 
            Xu H  
            Hotamisligil GS  
           Signaling pathways utilized by tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 in adipocytes to suppress differentiation FEBS Lett 2001 506 97 102 11591379 
[167] 
            Font de Mora J  
            Porras A  
            Ahn N  
            Santos E  
           Mitogen-activated protein kinase activation is not necessary for,but antagonizes, 3T3-L1 adipocytic differentiation Mol. Cell Biol 1997 17 6068 6075 9315666 
[168] 
            Tominaga S  
            Yamaguchi T  
            Takahashi S  
            Hirose F  
            Osumi T  
           Negative regulation of adipogenesis from human mesenchymal stem cells by Jun N-terminal kinase Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 2005 326 499 504 15582605 
[169] 
            Prusty D  
            Park BH  
            Davis KE  
            Farmer SR  
           Activation of MEK/ERK signaling promotes adipogenesis by enhancing peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and C/EBPalpha gene expression during the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes J. Biol. Chem 2002 277 46225 46232 
[170] 
            Park B-H  
            Qiang L  
            Farmer SR  
           Phosphorylation of C/EBP{beta} at a consensus extracellular signal-regulated kinase/glycogen synthase kinase 3 site is required for the induction of adiponectin gene expression during the differentiation of mouse fibroblasts into adipocytes Mol. Cell Biol 2004 24 8671 8680 15367685 
[171] 
            Berg AH  
            Lin Y  
            Lisanti MP  
            Scherer PE  
           Adipocyte differentiation induces dynamic changes in NF-kappaB expression and activity Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab 2004 287 E1178 E1188 15251865 
[172] 
            Sprott KM  
            Chumley MJ  
            Hanson JM  
            Dobrowsky RT  
           Decreased activity and enhanced nuclear export of CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein beta during inhibition of adipogenesis by ceramide Biochem. J 2002 365 181 191 12071851 
[173] 
            Cinti S  
           The role of brown adipose tissue in human obesity Nutr. Metab. Cardiovasc. Dis 2006 16 569 574 17113764 
[174] 
            Lowell BB  
            Flier JS  
           Brown adipose tissue, beta 3-adrenergic receptors, and obesity Annu. Rev. Med 1997 48 307 316 9046964 
[175] 
            Almind K  
            Manieri M  
            Sivitz WI  
            Cinti S  
            Kahn CR  
           Ectopic brown adipose tissue in muscle provides a mechanism for differences in risk of metabolic syndrome in mice Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007 104 2366 2371 17283342 
[176] 
            Coombes RC  
            Rothwell NJ  
            Shah P  
            Stock MJ  
           Changes in thermogenesis and brown fat activity in response to tumour necrosis factor in the rat Biosci. Rep 1987 7 791 799 3447641 
[177] 
            Masaki T  
            Yoshimatsu H  
            Chiba S  
            Hidaka S  
            Tajima D  
            Kakuma T  
            Kurokawa M  
            Sakata T  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha regulates in vivo expression of the rat UCP family differentially Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1999 1436 585 592 9989288 
[178] 
            Plata-Salaman CR  
           Central nervous system mechanisms contributing to the cachexia-anorexia syndrome Nutrition 2000 16 1009 1012 11054608 
[179] 
            Valladares A  
            Roncero C  
            Benito M  
            Porras A  
           TNF-alpha inhibits UCP-1 expression in brown adipocytes via ERKs. Opposite effect of p38MAPK FEBS Lett 2001 493 6 11 11277995 
[180] 
            Porras A  
            Valladares A  
            Alvarez AM  
            Roncero C  
            Benito M  
           Differential role of PPAR[gamma] in the regulation of UCP-1 and adipogenesis by TNF-[alpha] in brown adipocytes FEBS Lett 2002 520 58 62 12044870 
[181] 
            Porras A  
            Alvarez AM  
            Valladares A  
            Benito M  
           TNF-alpha induces apoptosis in rat fetal brown adipocytes in primary culture FEBS Lett 1997 416 324 328 9373178 
[182] 
            Valverde AM  
            Teruel T  
            Navarro P  
            Benito M  
            Lorenzo M  
           Tumor necrosis factor-alpha causes insulin receptor substrate-2-mediated insulin resistance and inhibits insulin-induced adipogenesis in fetal brown adipocytes Endocrinology 1998 139 1229 1238 9492058 
[183] 
            Jimenez M  
            Barbatelli G  
            Allevi R  
            Cinti S  
            Seydoux J  
            Giacobino JP  
            Muzzin P  
            Preitner F  
           Beta 3-adrenoceptor knockout in C57BL/6J mice depresses the occurrence of brown adipocytes in white fat Eur. J. Biochem 2003 270 699 705 12581209 

