LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   951641621931ILAR JILAR JILAR journal / National Research Council, Institute of Laboratory Animal Resources1084-20201930-6180235205944739507NIHMS754201ArticleThe Neurobiology of Addictive-Like Behaviors Van Bockstaele Elisabeth J. Department of Neuroscience, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 1910726 1 2016 2012 03 2 2016 53 1 1 3 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
   Addiction remains one of our society's major public health problems, posing a significant threat to the health, social and economic fabric of individuals, families, communities and nations. Over the past two decades, preclinical and clinical research studies have yielded significant new information that has contributed to improving our understanding of the neural substrates underlying the biological basis of addictive-like behaviors. However, even as scientists learn more about the neurobiological underpinnings of addiction, a great deal remains unknown and new categories of addictions (e.g. prescription medications, food, internet, gambling, sex, shopping) are being defined.

The theme of this issue centers on the neurobiology of addictive-like behaviors. As illustrated in the accompanying articles, addiction is varied and complex, and is often co-morbid with other psychiatric disorders. Convergent evidence from the fields of neuroscience, genetics and psychiatry has provided significant insight into the neurobiological adaptations underlying addictive-like behaviors. In the present issue, the topic of the neurobiology of addictive-like behaviors will be considered from several different perspectives. Hsiung, Wu and Schulz discuss the importance of the development of appropriate animal models to study addictive-like behaviors. Steiner and Van Waes review the effects of psychostimulants (e.g. cocaine, amphetamine) on gene regulation in the brain and discuss how these molecular changes contribute to the addiction liability of these substances. Furthermore, as reviewed by Quinones-Jenab and Jenab, the contribution of gender has taken on new importance in the management of addictive-related behaviors and studies examining the influence of sex in substance abuse, for example, have shown differences in all aspects of drug abuse history (i.e. age of first use, progression to dependence, and propensity to relapse following drug abstinence). More recently, an emphasis has been placed on the study of addictive-like behaviors related to non-drug related ‘reinforcers’, such as food. Corwin and Babbs introduces the notion of binge eating in the context of the field of addictive-like behaviors. The neurobiological mechanisms that control food intake, particularly excessive food intake, and how these systems may be co-opted to control consumption of the commonly-used drug, alcohol, will be reviewed by Barson and colleagues. Finally, Michaelides and colleagues will discuss the striking similarities in functional impairment within discrete brain regions and neurotransmitter circuits between drug addiction and obesity.

To understand addictive-like behaviors, it is necessary to elucidate the fundamental neural (e.g. synaptic) adaptations that occur following a single exposure to a ‘natural’ reward or addictive drug and, subsequently, how repetitive exposure may lead to neural circuit dysfunction that defines the phenotype of addiction. As our basic knowledge of adaptive experience-dependent plasticity continues to progress, it will lead to a better understanding of the substrates underlying neural circuit dysfunction and circuit re-modeling in addictive-like behaviors that will allow the identification of novel targets for intervention and treatment (Luscher and Malenka).

The Neural Substrates of Addiction
Understanding the classification of behaviors within the context of “addiction” continues to be a subject of extensive debate. Historically, the term “addiction” became largely synonymous with compulsive alcohol and drug use; however, the observation that compulsive behaviors related to non-drug related activities (gambling, eating, shopping) shared similar clinical, phenomenological and other biological profiles of drug-dependency prompted reconsideration of the core features of addiction. Therefore, addiction has been defined as a condition of dysfunctional motivated behavior (Volkow and Li 2004). In general terms, addiction is defined as compulsive behavioral engagement with diminished control over the behavior, and an appetitive urge or craving state. It is considered a chronically, relapsing disorder characterized by compulsive behaviors despite adverse consequences to self or others (Koob and Le Moal 2006).

For substance abuse, addictive-like behaviors are characterized by several phases, including acquisition, maintenance, escalation, and dependence. Although family history represents one of the greatest risk factors for drug addiction, genetic factors likely explain only about 50% of the risk for addiction. Genetic linkage studies have provided significant advances regarding the genetic variations underlying drug addiction (Maze and Nestler, 2011); however, much remains to be understood. Research has primarily focused on environmental influences although it is widely accepted that a combination of environmental stimuli and an individual's genetic constitution determines initial responses to drugs of abuse, as well as maladaptations to repeated drug exposure that underlie the transition to an addicted state (Maze and Nestler 2011).

‘Natural’ rewards (i.e. food and sex) and drugs of abuse mediate their reinforcing properties by targeting the mesocorticolimbic dopamine (DA) system, a brain circuit which is defined by projections from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to its major targets, the nucleus accumbens (NAcb), a brain region involved in motor and limbic functions, and the prefrontal cortex (PFC), a brain region involved in decision making and executive functions (Koob 1992). It is increasingly recognized that most drugs of abuse share a common mechanism involving increases in extracellular concentrations of dopamine in the NAcb via activation of dopaminergic neurons in the VTA (Willuhn et al. 2011). This working model predicts that dopamine release in response to drug-related stimuli will be enhanced over stimuli associated with natural reinforcers, which may result in aberrant goal-directed behaviors contributing to drug addiction. Although dopamine is integral to the initial euphoric effects of several drugs of abuse (Di Chiara and Imperato 1988), several lines of evidence indicate that neural circuits outside of the reward pathway become engaged and contribute to eliciting drug-seeking activities (Goto and Grace 2005, Hyman et al. 2006).

In addition to the involvement of select neural circuits, the importance of glutamate signaling in response to numerous drugs of abuse, including amphetamines, benzodiazepines, cocaine, ethanol, nicotine and opiates has been recently recognized (for review see, (Koob 2003, Cunha-Oliveira et al. 2008, Kalivas et al. 2009). Disruption of normal glutamate transmission has been implicated in drug-dependent excitotoxicity, drug seeking and reinstatement, as well as reward and reinforcement (Kalivas et al. 2006, Kalivas et al. 2009, Knackstedt and Kalivas 2009). For many drugs of abuse, glutamate-opioid interactions are important determinants of addictive processes in the brain, and both stress and exposure to drugs of abuse engage the glutamatergic system at common neural sites (Fitzgerald et al. 1996). As with many addictive compounds, opiate abuse can lead to disturbances in excitatory amino acid signaling, particularly through homeostatic disruption of glutamate, a ubiquitous excitatory neurotransmitter in the nervous system (Cunha-Oliveira et al. 2008). As a result, numerous investigators have explored the nature of glutamate-opioid interactions in drug abuse in the hopes of better identifying potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of addiction.

Animal models for the study of addictive-like behaviors
Animal studies have been crucial in elucidating the neurobiological basis of addictive-like behaviors. Such models have provided a means to directly manipulate variables of interest and have been critical for elucidating the neuropharmacological mechanisms involved in different phases of the addiction process. Animal models often focus on the ability of the drug itself to directly regulate the animal's behavior, thereby allowing comparisons with human studies. The initial demonstration in laboratory animals that drugs could serve as reinforcers resulted in the development of self-administration paradigms that have been useful as models of human drug abuse. However, with the recognition of the existence of distinct phases in the addiction process, interest is increasing in developing more comprehensive models that can inform the differential vulnerability to drug abuse, the transition from controlled to compulsive drug use, and relapse to drug use after a period of abstinence. Understanding the progression to addictive-like behaviors and the biological basis for vulnerability to relapse in animal models will enable closer comparison to the human condition. To this end, an emphasis is placed on the design of preclinical research experiments that will best inform translational and clinical studies.

In the first article of this issue, Hsiung, Wu and Schulz discuss animal models employed to study drug reward and addiction with particular emphasis on the development of animal models for alcohol addiction research. Steiner and Van Waes then review findings related to psychostimulant-induced gene regulation in corticostriatal circuits and expand this topic to include an assessment of the molecular changes produced by cognitive enhancers methylphenidate, amphetamine (Adderall) and modafinil, that have emerged over the last decade. The authors provide compelling evidence to show that protracted exposure to these cognitive enhancers has the potential to induce qualitatively similar gene regulation effects in corticostriatal circuits as the psychostimulants, cocaine and amphetamine. These neuronal effects likely contribute to the addiction liability of these cognitive enhancers.

Jenab and Quinones-Jenab review the role of gonadal hormones as a factor contributing to the sexually dimorphic pattern of behavioral responses to cocaine. Interestingly, For example, in females, estradiol has facilitatory effects, but progesterone inhibits most cocaine responses. Furthermore, they discuss chromosomal mechanisms that contribute to drug-abuse vulnerability.

Corwin and Babbs review current rodent models of bingeing, their contributions to our scientific understanding of bingeing, their validity in the face of DSM criteria, and their overlap with our knowledge of addiction. These models indicate that certain foods, within very specific contexts, can provoke behavioral changes and hijack neuronal systems involved in the normal regulation of food intake in a manner similar to that of drugs of abuse.

The article by Barson, Morganstern, and Leibowitz provides a detailed review of animal models used by researchers to study excessive food intake as well as the brain regions involved in mediating food consumption. This is followed by a review of the neurochemicals involved in food intake regulation, with a particular focus on the orexigenic neuropeptides. Finally, the authors consider how involvement of selected neurochemicals may generalize to other abused substances, such as alcohol.

Using pre-clinical and clinical non-invasive neuroimaging, Michaelides and colleagues explain that drug addiction and obesity share striking similarities in functional impairment within discrete brain regions and neurotransmitter circuits. Similar abnormalities in brain glucose metabolism are observed in the prefrontal cortex (a region critical for inhibitory control) and the hippocampus (a region critical for memory) and impairments in dopamine signaling in the striatum (a region involved in food and drug reward, goal-oriented behaviors). This article provides compelling evidence for the use of non-invasive brain imaging strategies for modeling motivational diseases such as drug addiction and obesity in humans.

The issue concludes with important recommendations for IACUC members by Hughes Moore as these committees consider the multiple facets involved in investigations into the neurobiology of addictive-like behaviors.


   
            Cunha-Oliveira T  
            Rego AC  
            Oliveira CR  
           2008 Cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in the neurotoxicity of opioid and psychostimulant drugs Brain Res Rev 58 192 208 18440072 

            Di Chiara G Imperato A  
           1988 Drugs abused by humans preferentially increase synaptic dopamine concentrations in the mesolimbic system of freely moving rats Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 85 5274 5278 2899326 

            Fitzgerald LW  
            Ortiz J  
            Hamedani AG  
            Nestler EJ  
           1996 Drugs of abuse and stress increase the expression of GluR1 and NMDAR1 glutamate receptor subunits in the rat ventral tegmental area: common adaptations among cross-sensitizing agents J Neurosci 16 274 282 8613793 

            Goto Y  
            Grace AA  
           2005 Dopamine-dependent interactions between limbic and prefrontal cortical plasticity in the nucleus accumbens: disruption by cocaine sensitization Neuron 47 255 266 16039567 

            Hyman SE  
            Malenka RC  
            Nestler EJ  
           2006 Neural mechanisms of addiction: the role of reward-related learning and memory Annu Rev Neurosci 29 565 598 16776597 

            Kalivas PW  
            Lalumiere RT  
            Knackstedt L  
            Shen H  
           2009 Glutamate transmission in addiction Neuropharmacology 56 169 173 18675832 

            Kalivas PW  
            Peters J  
            Knackstedt L  
           2006 Animal models and brain circuits in drug addiction Mol Interv 6 339 344 17200461 

            Knackstedt LA  
            Kalivas PW  
           2009 Glutamate and reinstatement Curr Opin Pharmacol 9 59 64 19157986 

            Koob GF  
           1992 Neural mechanisms of drug reinforcement Ann N Y Acad Sci 654 171 191 1632582 

            Koob GF  
           2003 Neuroadaptive mechanisms of addiction: studies on the extended amygdala Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 13 442 452 14636960 

            Koob GF  
            Le Moal M  
           2006 Neurobiology of Addiction Academic Press San Diego, CA 

            Luscher C  
            Malenka RC  
           2011 Drug-evoked synaptic plasticity in addiction: from molecular changes to circuit remodeling Neuron 69 650 663 21338877 

            Maze I  
            Nestler EJ  
           2011 The epigenetic landscape of addiction Ann N Y Acad Sci 1216 99 113 21272014 

            Volkow ND  
            Li TK  
           2004 Drug addiction: the neurobiology of behaviour gone awry Nat Rev Neurosci 5 963 970 15550951 

            Willuhn I  
            Wanat MJ  
            Clark JJ  
            Phillips PE  
           2011 Dopamine signaling in the nucleus accumbens of animals self-administering drugs of abuse Curr Top Behav Neurosci 3 29 71 21161749 

