LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10155829239070J Nutr Gerontol GeriatrJ Nutr Gerontol GeriatrJournal of nutrition in gerontology and geriatrics2155-11972155-120025105711436454110.1080/21551197.2014.943635NIHMS671022ArticleGuest Editorial: Translational advancements in applications of pureed food Keller Heather H. Ph.D., RDSchlegel Research Chair, Nutrition &amp; Aging, Research Scientist, UW-Schlegel Research Institute of Aging, Professor, Applied Health Sciences, University of Waterloo Waterloo, OntarioLocher Julie L. Ph.D., MSPHDirector, Translational Nutrition and Aging Program, Associate Director for Enrichment, Nutrition and Obesity Research Center, Associate Director for Public Policy, Nutrition and Aging Energetics (Comprehensive Center for Healthy Aging and Lister Hill Center for Health Policy), Professors of Medicine and Public Health, Division of Gerontology, Geriatrics, and Palliative Care, Department of Health Care Organization and Policy, University of Alabama at BirminghamSteele Catriona M. Ph.D.CCC-SLP, SLP(C), Reg. CASLPO, BCS-S, ASHA, Fellow, Senior Scientist and Director, Swallowing Rehabilitation Research Laboratory, Toronto Rehabilitation Institute - University Health Network Professor, Speech-Language Pathology, University of Toronto12 3 2015 2014 18 3 2015 33 3 135 138 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
   Modified texture food, and specifically pureed food, are integrally involved in the management of nutritional intake in patients with oral-pharyngeal dysphagia. Pureed food is also commonly used to provide adequate nutrition for persons with chewing difficulties or any other challenge that affects the manipulation and preparation of solid foods prior to the swallow. The growing number of older adults, combined with increased survival of persons with head/neck cancer, stroke and dementia—all common reasons for dysphagia and oral preparation difficulties-- highlight the increased need to better manage these problems with modified solid textures (1-3). Dysphagia specifically has the potential to result in significant negative outcomes including malnutrition, dehydration, aspiration pneumonia, impaired health and quality of life (3). Unfortunately, research to date suggests that inferior nutritional and sensory qualities of pureed food have the potential to contribute to these poor outcomes, as well. Specifically, pureed food is known to be poorer in calories, protein and micronutrients (3-5). Some technological advances have been attempted to improve the nutritional and sensory quality such as formed and shaped food and micronutrient enhancement (6-8). However these advances have yet to lead to changes in practice, potentially due to implementation challenges that cannot be readily absorbed into the small food budgets provided in many care environments (9).

In this special issue of the Journal of Nutrition in Gerontology and Geriatrics six original and novel articles further explore how pureed food can be improved upon so as to better meet the expectations of consumers and providers. Two qualitative studies explore the perceptions of consumers and care providers (10,11). These studies are the first of their kind, including diverse sites and participants—thus, yielding varied perspectives on pureed food from unique experiences within different production systems. Several suggestions to help pureed food meet expectations that are feasible and practicable to implement within current care environments with staffing and budget limitations have been provided. For example, staff needs to be trained on how to handle and present the food in a consistent and respectful manner for consumers wherein modest changes in presentation can improve visual appeal without the expense of re-forming food (10).

Commercially prepared pureed food is a common alternative for many care environments, either as their sole source of this modified texture, or at minimum for key foods that are either difficult to puree or where in-house production to ensure a nutritionally sound product is challenging (9). The first study on commercially prepared food in this special issue compares and contrasts the nutritional, sensory, and textural qualities of vegetable, meat, and bread products (12). This analysis demonstrates the significant diversity on these attributes of popular commercial brands. Standardization of texture and nutritional quality at a minimum will help to improve commercial products. The second study compares the reactions of actual consumers and healthy older adults regarding a selection of these commercial products (13). Results confirm that perceptions of actual consumers are not equivalent to those of healthy older adults. Thus, to test and improve upon products, work with actual consumers is required.

Many care environments, and especially long-term care homes, produce most of their modified textures in-house (9). This may be due to philosophies of care and the desire to provide food consistent with that of typical consumers, or the financial limitations of outsourcing food production (9). The final two papers in this special issue are focused on improving in-house produced pureed food (14,15). In the first study, nutrition managers and cooks in long-term care homes were asked about processes for preparing pureed food (14). Key challenges were identified, including: difficulties with following the standardized recipes as well as governmental guidelines; lack of consistency in terminology, as well as resulting texture; and wanting to make improvements, especially in the visual appeal. Suggestions for making improvements and overcoming these challenges were also offered by cooks and nutrition managers. The final paper demonstrates how making simple, basic changes in recipes and preparation methods can improve the quality of a pureed meat and a pureed vegetable product (15). This analysis is the first of its kind to demonstrate that differences in nutritional and texture qualities can result from modest changes in recipes. Although only two products were tested, the strategies used to improve quality can be transferred to other recipes for in-house production.

This series of articles, all focused on improving pureed food, provides a platform to better support commercial and in-house production of this modified texture. Overarching results suggest that: a) current pureed food, whether produced in-house or commercially, does not meet expectations for sensory and nutritional quality, and b) pureed food can be improved upon, with respect to both nutritional and sensory appeal, with relatively modest changes. Feasible suggestions to upgrade pureed food are provided in each paper. Dedication and perseverance to improving the status quo with respect to pureed food is needed to make these advances. The value difference is noted by consumers who report improved quality of life (10) and by caregivers who feel good about the food they are providing (11, 14). From production to plating, advancements in pureed food can and need to be made.

Supported by a National Institute on Aging grant K07AG043588 (Locher JL)


   References
1 
            Humbert IA  
            Robbins J  
           Dysphagia in the Elderly. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America 2008 19 4 853 866 18940645 
2 
            Cormier D  
            O'hara PA  
            Brillant C  
            Caissie D  
            Dubeau J  
            Mitalas J  
           Puréed diet: prevalence and reported reasons for use in a long-term care hospital. Journal of Canadian Dietetic Association 1994 55 3 121 124 
3 
            Keller H  
            Chambers L  
            Niezgoda H  
            Duizer L  
           Issues associated with the use of modified texture foods. Journal of Nutrition Health &amp; Aging 2012 16 3 195 200 
4 
            Wright L  
            Cotter D  
            Hickson M  
            Frost G  
           Comparison of energy and protein intake of older people consuming a texture modified diet with a normal hospital diet. British Dietetic Association 2005 18 213 219 
5 
            Nowson CA  
            Shervin AJ  
            McPhee JG  
            Wark JD  
            Flicker L  
           Energy, protein, calcium, vitamin D and fibre intakes from meals in residential care establishments in Australia. Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2003 12 2 172 7 12810407 
6 
            Germain I  
            Dufresne T  
            Gray-Donald K  
           A novel dysphagia diet improves the nutrient intake of institutionalized elders. Journal of the American Dietetic Association 2006 106 10 1614 23 17000194 
7 
            Adolphe JL  
            Whiting SJ  
            Dahl WJ  
           Vitamin fortification of puréed foods for long-term care residents. Canadian Journal of Dietetic Practice Research 2009 70 143 150 19709470 
8 
            Keller H  
            Chambers L  
            Ferugsson DA  
            NIezgoda H  
            Parent MF  
            Cassie D  
            Lemire N  
           A mix menu of bulk and ready to use modified-texture food: Impact on older adults requiring dysphagic food. Canadian Journal of Aging 2012 31 3 1 14 
9 
            Anciado K  
            Ilhamto N  
            Keller H  
            Duizer L  
           Purchasing commercially prepared pureed foods: nutrition managers' perspectives. Journal of Foodservice Management &amp; Education 2012 6 1 9 16 
10 
            Keller H  
            Duizer L  
           What do consumers think of pureed food? Making the most of the indistinguishable food. Journal of Nutrition, Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics 2014 
11 
            Keller H  
            Duizer L  
           Keeping Consumers Safe: Food Providers' Perspectives on Pureed Food. Journal of Nutrition, Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics 2014 
12 
            Ettinger L  
            Keller H  
            Duizer  
           Characterizing Commercial Pureed Foods: Sensory, Nutritional, and Textural Analysis Journal of Nutrition, Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics 2014 
13 
            Ettinger L  
            Keller H  
            Duizer L  
           A comparison of liking of pureed foods between two groups of older adults. Journal of Nutrition, Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics in press 
14 
            Ilhamto N  
            Anciado K  
            Keller HH  
            Duizer LM  
           In-house pureed food production in long-term care: perspectives of dietary staff and implications for improvement. Journal of Nutrition, Gerontology, &amp; Geriatrics 2014 
15 
            Ilhamto N  
            Keller HH  
            Duizer LM  
           The Effect of Varying Ingredient Composition on the Sensory and Nutritional Properties of a Pureed Meat and Vegetable. Journal of Nutrition, Gerontology, &amp; Geriatrics 2014 

