LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10089739529765Obes RevObes RevObesity reviews : an official journal of the International Association for the Study of Obesity1467-78811467-789X23016694482734310.1111/j.1467-789X.2012.01031.xNIHMS763000ArticlePro v Con Reviews: Is Food Addictive? Obesity and addiction: neurobiological overlapsVolkow N. D. 1Wang G.-J. 2Tomasi D. 2Baler R. D. 11 National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA2 Medical Department Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York, USAAddress for correspondence: Dr ND Volkow, National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH, 6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 5274, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. nvokowl@nida.nih.gov15 3 2016 27 9 2012 1 2013 11 4 2016 14 1 2 18 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Summary
Drug addiction and obesity appear to share several properties. Both can be defined as disorders in which the saliency of a specific type of reward (food or drug) becomes exaggerated relative to, and at the expense of others rewards. Both drugs and food have powerful reinforcing effects, which are in part mediated by abrupt dopamine increases in the brain reward centres. The abrupt dopamine increases, in vulnerable individuals, can override the brain’s homeostatic control mechanisms. These parallels have generated interest in understanding the shared vulnerabilities between addiction and obesity. Predictably, they also engendered a heated debate. Specifically, brain imaging studies are beginning to uncover common features between these two conditions and delineate some of the overlapping brain circuits whose dysfunctions may underlie the observed deficits. The combined results suggest that both obese and drug-addicted individuals suffer from impairments in dopaminergic pathways that regulate neuronal systems associated not only with reward sensitivity and incentive motivation, but also with conditioning, self-control, stress reactivity and interoceptive awareness. In parallel, studies are also delineating differences between them that centre on the key role that peripheral signals involved with homeostatic control exert on food intake. Here, we focus on the shared neurobiological substrates of obesity and addiction.

Addictiondopamineobesityprefrontal cortex
   Background
Drugs of abuse tap into the neuronal mechanisms that modulate the motivation to consume food, thus, it is not surprising that there is an overlap in the neuronal mechanisms implicated in the loss of control and overconsumption of food intake seen in obesity and in the compulsive intake of drugs seen in addiction. Central to these two pathologies is the disruption of brain dopamine (DA) pathways, which modulate the behavioural responses to environmental stimuli. The dopamine neurons reside in midbrain nuclei (ventral tegmental area or VTA, and substantia nigra pars compacta or SN) that project to striatal (nucleus accumbens or NAc and the dorsal striatum), limbic (amygdala and hippocampus) and cortical regions (prefrontal cortex, cingulate gyrus, temporal pole) and modulate the motivation and sustainability of effort necessary to accomplish behaviours needed for survival. To achieve its functions, DA neurons receive projections from brain regions involved with autonomic responses (i.e. hypothalamus, brainstem), memory (hippocampus), emotional reactivity (amygdala), arousal (thalamus) and cognitive control (prefrontal cortex and cingulate) through a vast array of neurotransmitters and peptides. Thus, it is not surprising that neurotransmitters implicated in drug-seeking behaviours are also implicated in food intake and, conversely, that peptides that regulate food intake also influence the reinforcing effects of drugs (Tables 1 and 2). However, in striking contrast to drugs whose actions are triggered by their direct pharmacological effects in the brain reward DA pathway (NAc and ventral pallidum), the regulation of eating behaviours and hence the responses to food, are modulated by multiple peripheral and central mechanisms that directly or indirectly convey information to the brain’s DA reward pathway with a particular prominent role of the hypothalamus (Fig. 1).

The peripheral signals include peptides and hormones (e.g. leptin, insulin, cholecystokinin or CCK, tumour necrosis factor-α) but also nutrients (e.g. sugars and lipids), that are transported via afferents of the vagus nerve to the nucleus solitary tract and directly through receptors located in the hypothalamus and other autonomic and limbic brain regions. These multiple signalling pathways ensure that food is consumed when needed, even if any one of these redundant mechanisms fails. However, with repeated access to highly palatable food, some individuals (both humans as well as laboratory animals) may eventually override the inhibitory processes that signal satiety and begin to compulsively consume large amounts of food despite nutrition overload and even repulsion at this behaviour in the case of humans. This loss of control and compulsive pattern of food intake is reminiscent of the drug intake patterns seen in addiction and has led to the description of obesity as a form of ‘food addiction’ (1).

The brain DA reward circuitry, which modulates the responses to the environment, increases the probability that behaviours that activate it (food consumption or drug intake) will be repeated when encountering the same rein-forcer (specific food or drug). Disruption of the DA reward circuit has been implicated in the loss of control seen in both addiction and obesity (2), although the physiological mechanisms that disrupt the function of the DA striatal circuits, including those implicated in reward (ventral striatum) and in habit formation (dorsal striatum), present clear divergences (3). In addition, self-control and compulsive intake (whether of food or drugs) occurs in a dimensional continuum, strongly influenced by the context, which can go from total control to no control at all. The fact that the same individual can exert better control in some circumstances than in others indicates that these are dynamic and flexible processes in the brain. It is when these patterns (loss of control and compulsive intake) become rigid and dictate the behaviour and choices of the individual, despite their adverse consequences, that a pathological state akin to the concept of addiction can be invoked. However, just as most individuals that consume drugs are not addicted, most individuals that eat excessively retain control over their food intake in some instances but not in others. However, the debate over whether obesity reflects ‘food addiction’ fails to consider the dimensional nature of these two disorders.

Proposals have also been made to model drug addiction as an infectious disease (4,5), which are useful for analyzing its social, epidemiological and economic components (4,6) but lead to the notion that drugs are like infectious agents and that addiction can be solved by eradicating drugs. A corollary is the belief that getting rid of palatable foods would solve ‘food addiction’. But this agent-centred conceptual framework flies in the face of our current understanding of drugs (and other behavioural patterns, including disordered eating) as part of a vast and heterogeneous family of ‘triggers’, with the ability to expose, under the suitable (environmental) circumstances, an underlying (biological) vulnerability.

Finally, this debate is further hindered by the very word ‘addiction’, which conjures up the stigma linked to a character flaw, thus making it hard to get past its negative connotations. Here, we propose a position that recognizes the fact that these two diseases share neurobiological processes that, when disrupted, can result in compulsive consumption and loss of control in a dimensional continuum, while also involving unique neurobiological processes (Fig. 2). We present key evidence, at various phenomenological levels, of shared neurobiological substrates.

The overwhelming urge to seek and consume a drug is one of the hallmarks of addiction. Multidisciplinary research has linked such powerful craving to adaptations in the brain circuitry in charge of anticipating and assessing reward and learning conditioned associations that drive habits and automatic behaviours (7). In parallel, there are impairments in circuits involved with self-control and decision-making, interoception and mood and stress regulation (8). This functional model of addiction can also be used to understand why some obese individuals find it so difficult to properly regulate their caloric intake and maintain energy homeostasis. It is important to mention that we use ‘obesity’ for the sake of simplicity, for this dimensional analysis also encompasses non-obese individuals suffering from other eating disorders (e.g. binge eating disorder [BED] and anorexia nervosa) (9,10), which are also likely to involve imbalances in reward and self-control circuits.

The evolution of eating behaviours was driven by the need to attain the energy homeostasis required for survival and shaped by complex regulatory mechanisms that involve central (e.g. hypothalamus) and peripheral (e.g. stomach, gastrointestinal tract, fat tissue) structures. Most of the differences between addiction and obesity pathophysiologies arise from dysfunctions at this level of regulation, namely, energy homeostasis. But feeding behaviours are also influenced by another layer of regulation that involves processing of rewards through DA signalling and its ability to condition food-associated stimuli that then will trigger the desire for the associated food. Research is uncovering a high level of communication between these two regulatory processes, such that the line between the homeostatic and the hedonic control of feeding behaviours is becoming increasingly blurred (Tables 1 and 2). A good example is the new genetic, pharmacological and neuroimaging evidence showing direct influences of certain peptide hormones (e.g. peptide YY [PYY], ghrelin and leptin) on DA-modulated regions including those involved in reward (VTA, NAc and ventral pallidum), self-control (prefrontal cortices), interoception (cingulate, insula), emotions (amygdala), habits and routines (dorsal striatum) and learning memory (hippocampus) (11).

Dopamine at the centre of brain networks mediating reactivity to environmental stimuli
Virtually every complex system relies on a highly organized network that mediates effective tradeoffs among efficiency, robustness and evolvability. It has been noted that studying the predictable fragilities of such networks offers some of the best avenues to understand disease pathogenesis (12). In most cases, these networks are arranged in a layered architecture that is often referred to as a ‘bow tie’ (12), whereby a narrowing funnel of many potential inputs converges onto a relatively small number of processes before fanning out again into a diversity of outputs. Eating behaviours present a great example of this architecture where the hypothalamus subserves the ‘knot’ of the metabolic bowtie (Fig. 3a) and the DA pathways subserve the ‘knot’ for reactivity to salient external stimuli (including drugs and food) and internal signals (including hypothalamic signalling and hormones such as leptin and insulin; Fig. 3b). Inasmuch as midbrain DA neurons (both VTA and SN) orchestrate the appropriate behavioural responses to a myriad of external and internal stimuli, they represent a critical ‘knot’ whose fragilities are bound to underlie dysfunctional responses to a broad array of inputs, including drug and food reward.

The role of dopamine in acute reward to drugs and food
Drugs of abuse act on the reward and ancillary circuits through different mechanisms; however, they all lead to sharp DA increases in the NAc. Interestingly, evidence has been accumulating that comparable dopaminergic responses are linked with food reward and that these mechanisms are likely to play a role in excessive food consumption and obesity. It is well known that certain foods, particularly those rich in sugars and fat, are potently rewarding (13) and can trigger addictive-like behaviours in laboratory animals (14,15). However, the response to foods in humans, is far more complex, and is influenced not just by its palatability but also by its availability (the patterns of restriction plus overeating, referred to as the eating topography (16)), its visual appeal, economics and incentives (i.e., ‘super sizing’ offers, soda combos), social routines for eating, alternative reinforcement and advertisements (17).

High-calorie foods can promote over-eating (i.e. eating that is uncoupled from energetic needs) and trigger learned associations between the stimulus and the reward (conditioning). In evolutionary terms, this property of palatable foods used to be advantageous in environments where food sources were scarce and/or unreliable because it ensured that food was eaten when available, enabling energy to be stored in the body (as fat) for future use. However, in societies like ours, where food is plentiful and ubiquitous, this adaptation has become a dangerous liability.

Several neurotransmitters, including DA, cannabinoids, opioids, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and serotonin, as well as hormones and neuropeptides involved in homeostatic regulation of food intake, such as insulin, orexin, leptin, ghrelin, PYY, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) have been implicated in the rewarding effects of food and drugs (Tables 1 and 2) (18–21). Of these, DA has been the most thoroughly investigated and is the best characterized. Experiments in rodents have shown that, upon first exposure to a food reward, the firing of DA neurons in the VTA increases with a resulting increase in DA release in NAc (22). There is also extensive evidence that peripheral signals that modulate food intake exert their actions in part by hypothalamic signalling to VTA but also by their direct effects on the VTA DA meso-accumbens and meso-limbic pathways. Orexigenic peptides/hormones increase the activity of VTA DA cells and increase DA release in NAc (main target of VTA DA neurons) when exposed to food stimuli, whereas anorexigenic ones inhibit DA firing and decrease DA release (23). Moreover, neurons in the VTA and/or NAc express GLP-1 (24,25), ghrelin (26,27), leptin (28,29), insulin (30), orexin (31) and melanocortin receptors (32). Thus, it is not surprising that an increasing number of studies are reporting that these hormone/ peptides can modulate the rewarding effects of drugs of abuse (Table 1), which is also consistent with findings of attenuated responses to drug rewards in animal models of obesity (33,34). In humans, there have been reports of an inverse relationship between body mass index (BMI) and recent illicit drug use (35) and of an association between obesity and a lower risk for substance use disorders (36). Indeed, obese individuals show lower rates of nicotine (37) and marijuana abuse (38) than non-obese individuals. Moreover, juxtaposed interventions that decrease BMI and reduce plasma levels of insulin and leptin enhance the sensitivity to psychostimulant drugs (39). This is consistent with preclinical (40) and clinical (41) studies showing dynamic associations between the changes in neuroendocrine hormones (e.g. insulin, leptin, ghrelin) triggered by food restriction and brain DA signalling and those of recent reports of a relationship between addictive personality and maladaptive eating behaviours following bariatric surgery (42,43). Taken together, these results strongly suggest the possibility that food and drugs may be competing for overlapping reward mechanisms.

Brain imaging studies are beginning to provide important clues about such overlapping functional circuitry. For example, in healthy, normal-weight human subjects, ingestion of palatable food releases DA in the striatum in proportion to the ratings of meal pleasantness (44), while food stimuli activate brain regions that are part of the reward circuitry of the brain (45). It has also been reported more recently, that healthy human volunteers show robust striatal activation upon receipt of a milkshake, and that frequent ice cream consumption blunts the striatal responses (46). Other imaging studies have also shown that, consistent with the findings in laboratory animals, anorexigenic peptides (e.g. insulin, leptin, PYY) decrease the sensitivity of the brain reward system to food reward, whereas orexigenic ones (e.g. ghrelin) increase it (see review (47)).

However, as is the case for drugs and addiction, food-induced increases in striatal DA alone cannot explain the difference between normal food intake and excessive compulsive food consumption since these responses are present in healthy individuals who do not eat excessively. Thus, downstream adaptations are likely to be involved in the loss of control over food intake just as is the case for drug intake.

The transition to compulsive consumption
Dopamine’s role in reinforcement is more complex than just coding for hedonic pleasure. Specifically, stimuli that cause fast and large increases in DA induce conditioned responses and elicit incentive motivation to procure them (48). This is important because, thanks to conditioning, neutral stimuli that are linked to the reinforcer (whether a natural or a drug reinforcer) acquire the ability by themselves to increase DA in striatum (including NAc) in anticipation of the reward, thus engendering a strong motivation to perform and sustain the behaviours necessary to seek the drug or to seek the food (48). Thus, once conditioning has occurred, DA signals act as a predictor of reward (49), incentivizing the animal to perform the behaviour that will result in consuming the expected reward (drug or food). From preclinical studies, there is also evidence of a gradual shift in DA increases from NAc to dorsal striatum, which occurs for both, food and drugs. Specifically, whereas inherently rewarding novel stimuli engage ventral regions of the striatum (NAc), with repeated exposure, the cues associated with the reward then trigger DA increases in dorsal regions of the striatum (50). This transition is consistent with an initial involvement of the VTA and increasing involvement of SN and its associated dorso-striatalcortical network, with consolidated responses and routines.

The extensive glutamatergic afferents to DA neurons from regions involved in the processing of sensory (insula or primary gustatory cortex), homeostatic (hypothalamus), reward (NAc and ventral pallidum), emotional (amygdala and hippocampus) and multimodal (orbitofrontal cortex [OFC] for salience attribution) information, modulate their activity in response to rewards and to conditioned cues (51). Similarly, glutamatergic projections to the hypothalamus are involved in the neuroplastic changes that follow fasting and that facilitate feeding (52). For the reward network, projections from the amygdala and the OFC to DA neurons and to NAc are involved in conditioned responses to food (53) and drugs (54,55). Indeed, imaging studies showed that when non-obese male subjects were asked to inhibit their craving for food while being exposed to food cues, they exhibited decreased metabolic activity in amygdala and OFC (as well as in hippocampus), insula and striatum, and that the decreases in OFC were associated with reductions in food craving (56). A similar inhibition of the metabolic activity in the OFC (and also in NAc) has been observed in cocaine abusers when they were asked to inhibit their drug craving upon exposure to cocaine cues (57).

It should be mentioned in this context that, when compared to food cues, drug cues are more powerful triggers of reinforcer-seeking behaviour following a period of abstinence, at least in the case of animals that have not been food deprived (58). Also, once extinguished, drug-reinforced behaviours are far more susceptible to stress-induced reinstatement than food-reinforced behaviours (58). However, the difference appears to be one of degree rather than principle. Indeed, stress is not only associated with increased consumption of palatable foods and weight gain, but acute stress also uncovers a strong correlation between BMI and a potentiated activation in response to milkshake consumption in the OFC (59), a brain region that contributes to the encoding of salience and motivation. The dependence of the responses to food cues on the nutrition status (60,61) highlights the role of the homeostatic network in the control of the reward network, which in turn is also influenced by neuronal pathways that process stress.

The impact of dysfunction in self-control
The emergence of cue-conditioned cravings would not be as deleterious if they were not coupled with growing deficits in the brain’s ability to inhibit maladaptive behaviours. Indeed, the capacity to inhibit prepotent responses and exert self-control is bound to contribute to an individual’s ability to avoid engaging in excessive behaviours, such as taking drugs or eating past the point of satiety, and thus increasing his/her vulnerability to addiction (or obesity) (62,63).

Positron emission tomography (PET) studies have uncovered significant reductions in dopamine 2 receptor (D2R) availability in the striatum of addicted subjects that persist for months after protracted detoxification (reviewed in (64)). Similarly, preclinical studies in rodent and non-human primates have shown that repeated drug exposures are associated with reductions in striatal D2R levels and in D2R signalling (65–67). In the striatum, D2Rs mediate signalling in the striatal indirect pathway that modulates frontal cortical regions; and their down-regulation enhances sensitization to the effects of drugs in animal models (68), whereas their up-regulation interferes with drug consumption (69,70). Moreover, inhibition of striatal D2R or activation of D1R-expressing striatal neurons (which mediate signalling in the striatal direct pathway) enhance the sensitivity to the rewarding effects of drugs (71–73). However, the extent to which there are similar opposite regulatory processes for the direct and indirect pathways in food-eating behaviours remains to explored.

In humans addicted to drugs, the reduction in striatal D2R is associated with decreased activity of prefrontal regions, OFC, anterior cingulate gyrus (ACC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) (67,74,75). Insofar as OFC, ACC and DLPFC are involved with salience attribution, inhibitory control/emotion regulation and decision-making, respectively, it has been postulated that their improper regulation by D2R-mediated DA signalling in addicted subjects could underlie the enhanced motivational value of drugs in their behaviour and the loss of control over drug intake (62). In addition, because impairments in OFC and ACC are associated with compulsive behaviours and impulsivity, DA’s impaired modulation of these regions is likely to contribute to the compulsive and impulsive drug intake seen in addiction (76). A reverse scenario would depend on a pre-existing vulnerability for drug use in prefrontal regions, possibly exacerbated by further decreases in striatal D2R triggered by repeated drug use. Indeed, a study performed in subjects who, despite having a high risk for alcoholism (positive family history of alcoholism) were not alcoholics, revealed a higher than normal striatal D2R availability that was associated with normal metabolism in OFC, ACC and DLPFC (77). This suggests that, in these subjects at risk for alcoholism, the normal prefrontal function was linked to enhanced striatal D2R signalling, which in turn may have protected them from alcohol abuse. Interestingly, a recent study of siblings discordant for their addiction to stimulant drugs (78) showed brain differences in the morphology of the OFC, which were significantly smaller in the addicted sibling than in controls, whereas in the non-addicted siblings, the OFC did not differ from that of controls (79).

Evidence of dysregulated D2R striatal signalling has also been detected among obese individuals. Both preclinical and clinical studies have provided evidence of decreases in striatal D2R, which, through the NAc, are linked with reward and through the dorsal striatum with the establishment of habits and routines in obesity (80–82). So far, the one study that failed to detect a statistically significant reduction in striatal D2R between obese individuals and non-obese controls (83), may have been hampered by its low statistical power (n = 5/group). It is important to emphasize that, while these studies cannot address the question of whether the emerging association between low D2R and high BMI points to causality, decreased striatal D2R availability has been linked to compulsive food intake in obese rodents (84) and with decreased metabolic activity in OFC and ACC in obese humans (63). Given that dysfunction in OFC and ACC results in compulsivity (see review (85)), this might be part of the mechanism by which low-striatal D2R signalling facilitates hyperphagia (86,87). In addition, since decreased striatal D2R-related signalling is also likely to reduce the sensitivity to other natural rewards, this deficit in obese individuals may also contribute to compensatory overeating (88). It is pertinent to mention that the relative imbalance between brain reward and inhibitory circuits differs between patients suffering from Prader–Willi syndrome (characterized by hyperphagia and hyperghrelinemia) and simply obese patients (87), which, highlights the complex dimensionality of these disorders and their diversity.

The hypothesis of compensatory overeating is consistent with preclinical evidence showing that decreased DA activity in VTA results in a dramatic increase in the consumption of high-fat foods (89). Similarly, compared with normal-weight individuals, obese individuals who were presented with pictures of high-calorie food (stimuli to which they are conditioned) showed increased neural activation in regions that are part of reward and motivation circuits (NAc, dorsal striatum, OFC, ACC, amygdala, hippocampus and insula) (90). By contrast, in normal-weight controls, the activation of the ACC and OFC (regions involved in salience attribution that project into the NAc) during presentation of high-calorie food was found to be negatively correlated with their BMI (91). This suggests a dynamic interaction between the amount of food eaten (reflected in part in the BMI) and the reactivity of reward regions to high-calorie food (reflected in the activation of OFC and ACC) in normal-weight individuals but which was not observed in obese individuals.

Surprisingly, obese individuals exhibited less activation of reward circuits from actual food consumption (consummatory food reward) than lean individuals, whereas they showed greater activation of somatosensory cortical regions that process palatability when they anticipated consumption (91). The latter observation corresponded to regions where a previous study had revealed enhanced activity in obese subjects tested without any stimulation (92). An enhanced activity in brain regions that process palatability could make obese subjects favour food over other natural reinforcers, whereas decreased activation of dopaminergic targets by the actual food consumption might lead to overconsumption as a means to compensate for weak D2R-mediated signalling (93). This blunted response to food consumption in the reward circuitry of obese individuals is reminiscent of the reduced DA increases triggered by drug consumption in addicted individuals when compared to non-addicted subjects (94). As seen in addiction, it is also possible that some eating disorders may actually result from hypersensitivity to conditioned food cues. Indeed, in non-obese individuals with BED, we documented higher than normal release of DA in dorsal striatum (caudate) when exposed to food cues and this increase predicted the severity of the binge eating behaviours (95).

The prefrontal cortex (PFC) plays a crucial role in executive function, including self-control. These processes are modulated by D1R and D2R (presumably also D4R) and thus, the decreased activity in PFC, both in addiction and in obesity, is likely to contribute to poor self-control, impulsivity and high compulsivity. The lower-than-normal availability of D2R in the striatum of obese individuals, which has been associated with reduced activity in PFC and ACC (63) is therefore likely to contribute to their deficient control over food intake. Indeed, the negative correlation between BMI and striatal D2R reported in obese (81) and in overweight (96) individuals, as well as the correlation between BMI and decreased blood flow in prefrontal regions in healthy individuals (97,98) and decreased prefrontal metabolism in obese subjects (63) support this. A better understanding of the mechanisms that lead to impaired PFC function in obesity (or addiction) could facilitate the development of strategies to ameliorate, or perhaps even reverse, specific impairments in crucial cognitive domains. For example, delay discounting, which is the tendency to devalue a reward as a function of the temporal delay of its delivery, is one of the most extensively investigated cognitive operations in relation to disorders associated with impulsivity and compulsivity. Delay discounting has been most exhaustively investigated in drug abusers who exhibit an exaggerated preference of small-but-immediate over large-but-delayed rewards (99). However, studies performed with obese individuals have begun to uncover evidence of a preference for high, immediate rewards, despite an increased chance of suffering higher future losses (100,101). A recent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study of executive function in obese women, for example, identified regional differences in brain activation during delayed discounting tasks that were predictive of future weight gain (102). Yet, another study found a positive correlation between BMI and hyperbolic discounting, whereby future negative payoffs are discounted less than future positive payoffs (103). Interestingly, delay discounting seems to depend on the function of the ventral striatum (104) and of the PFC, including OFC (105) and its connections to the NAc (106), and is sensitive to DA manipulations (107).

Overlapping dysfunction in the motivation circuits
Dopaminergic signalling also modulates motivation. Behavioural traits such as vigor, persistence and investing a continued effort towards achieving a goal, are all subject to modulation by DA acting through several target regions, including NAc, ACC, OFC, DLPFC, amygdala, dorsal striatum and ventral pallidum (108). Dysregulated DA signalling is associated with enhanced motivation to procure drugs, a hallmark of addiction, which is why drug-addicted individuals often engage in extreme behaviours to obtain drugs, even when they entail known severe and adverse consequences and may require sustained and complex behaviours to obtain them (109). Because drug taking becomes the main motivational drive in drug addiction (110), addicted subjects are aroused and motivated by the process of obtaining the drug but tend to become withdrawn and apathetic when exposed to non–drug-related activities. This shift has been studied by comparing the brain activation patterns occurring upon exposure to conditioned cues with those occurring in the absence of such cues. In contrast to the decreases in prefrontal activity reported in detoxified cocaine abusers when not stimulated with drug or drug cues (see review (64)), these prefrontal regions become activated when cocaine abusers are exposed to craving-inducing stimuli (either drugs or cues) (111–113). Moreover, when the responses to i.v. methylphenidate are compared between cocaine-addicted and non-addicted individuals, the former responded with increased metabolism in ventral ACC and medial OFC (an effect associated with craving), while the latter showed decreased metabolism in these regions (114). This suggests that the activation of these prefrontal regions with drug exposure may be specific to addiction and associated with the enhanced desire for the drug. In addition, a study that prompted cocaine-addicted subjects to purposefully inhibit craving when exposed to drug cues showed that those subjects who were successful at inhibiting craving displayed decreased metabolism in medial OFC (which processes the motivational value of a reinforcer) and NAc (which predicts reward) (57). These findings further corroborate the involvement of OFC, ACC and striatum in the enhanced motivation to procure the drug seen in addiction.

The OFC is also involved in attributing salience value to food (115,116), helping to assess its expected pleasantness and palatability as a function of its context. PET studies with FDG to measure brain glucose metabolism in normal-weight individuals reported that exposure to food cues increased metabolic activity in OFC, which was associated with the desire for the food (117). The enhanced OFC activation by the food stimulation is likely to reflect downstream dopaminergic effects and participate in DA’s involvement in the drive for food consumption. The OFC plays a role in learning stimulus-reinforcement associations and conditioning (118,119), supports conditioned-cue-elicited feeding (120) and probably contributes to overeating irrespective of hunger signals (121). Indeed, damage to the OFC can result in hyperphagia (122,123).

Clearly, some of the individual differences in executive function can constitute a prodromal risk for later obesity in some individuals, as revealed by a recent latent class analysis of 997 fourth graders in a school-based obesity prevention program (124). Interestingly, albeit predictably, a cross-sectional investigation of children’s ability to self-regulate, solve problems and engage in goal-directed health behaviours reveals executive function proficiency to be negatively correlated not only with substance use but also with the consumption of high-calorie snack foods, and with sedentary behaviours (125).

In spite of some inconsistencies among studies, brain imaging data also support the notion that structural and functional changes in brain regions implicated in executive function (including inhibitory control) may be associated with high BMI in otherwise healthy individuals. For example, an MRI study done in elderly women, using voxel-based morphometry, found a negative correlation between BMI and grey matter volumes (including frontal regions), which, in the OFC, was associated with impaired executive function (126). Using PET to measure brain glucose metabolism in healthy controls, we reported a negative correlation between BMI and metabolic activity in DLPFC, OFC and ACC. In this study, the metabolic activity in prefrontal regions predicted the subjects’ performance in tests of executive function (98). Similarly, a nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic study in healthy middle age and elderly controls showed that BMI was negatively associated with the levels of N-acetyl-aspartate (a marker of neuronal integrity) in frontal cortex and ACC (98,127).

Brain imaging studies comparing obese and lean individuals have also reported lower grey matter density in frontal regions (frontal operculum and middle frontal gyrus) and in post-central gyrus and putamen (128). Another study found no differences in grey matter volumes between obese and lean subjects; however, it did record a positive correlation between white matter volume in basal brain structures and waist to hip ratios, a trend that was partially reversed by dieting (129). Interestingly, cortical areas, like the DPFC and OFC that are involved in inhibitory control, have also been found to become activated in successful dieters in response to meal consumption (130), suggesting a potential target for behavioural retraining in the treatment of obesity (and also in addiction).

The involvement of interoceptive circuitry
Neuroimaging studies have revealed that the middle insula plays a critical role in cravings for food, cocaine and cigarettes (131–133). The importance of the insula has been highlighted by a study that reported that smokers with damage to this region (but not smokers who had suffered extra-insular lesions) were able to stop smoking easily and without experiencing either cravings or relapse (134). The insula, particularly its more anterior regions, is reciprocally connected to several limbic regions (e.g. ventromedial prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and ventral striatum) and appears to have an interoceptive function, integrating the autonomic and visceral information with emotion and motivation, thus providing conscious awareness of these urges (135). Indeed, brain lesion studies suggest that the ventromedial PFC and insula are necessary components of the distributed circuits that support emotional decision-making (136). Consistent with this hypothesis, many imaging studies show differential activation of the insula during craving (135). Accordingly, the reactivity of this brain region has been suggested to serve as a biomarker to help predict relapse (137).

The insula is also a primary gustatory area, which participates in many aspects of eating behaviours, such as taste. In addition, the rostral insula (connected to primary taste cortex) provides information to the OFC that influences its multimodal representation of the pleasantness or reward value of incoming food (138). Because of the insula’s involvement in the interoceptive sense of the body, in emotional awareness (139) and in motivation and emotion (138), a contribution of insular impairment in obesity should not be surprising. And indeed, gastric distension results in activation of the posterior insula, consistent with its role in the awareness of body states (in this case of fullness) (140). Moreover, in lean, but not in obese subjects, gastric distension resulted in activation of the amygdala and deactivation of the anterior insula (141). The lack of amygdalar response in obese subjects could reflect a blunted interoceptive awareness of bodily states linked with satiety (full stomach). Even though the modulation of insular activity by DA has been poorly investigated, it is recognized that DA is involved in the responses to tasting of palatable foods that are mediated through the insula (142). Human imaging studies have shown that tasting palatable foods activated the insula and midbrain areas (143,144). DA signalling may also be necessary for sensing the calorie content of food. For example, when normal-weight women tasted a sweetener with calories (sucrose), both the insula and dopaminergic midbrain areas became activated, whereas tasting a calorie-free sweetener (sucralose) only activated the insula (144). Obese subjects exhibit greater insular activation than normal controls when tasting a liquid meal that consists of sugar and fat (143). In contrast, when tasting sucrose, subjects who have recovered from anorexia nervosa show less insular activation and no association with feelings of pleasantness as observed in controls (145). Furthermore, a recent fMRI study that compared brain responses to repeated presentations of appetizing and bland food pictures in morbidly obese vs. non-obese individuals (146) found functional changes in the responsiveness and interconnectivity among key regions of the reward circuit that might help explain the oversensitivity to food cues in obese individuals. The observed changes suggest excessive input from the amygdala and insula; these, in turn could trigger exaggerated stimulus-response learning and incentive motivation to food cues in the dorsal caudate nucleus, which could become overwhelming in light of weak inhibitory control by fronto-cortical regions.

The circuitry of aversion and stress reactivity
As mentioned before, training (conditioning) on a cue that predicts reward leads to dopaminergic cells firing in response to reward prediction, and not to the reward itself. On the other hand, and consistent with this logic, it has been observed that dopaminergic cells will fire less than normal if the expected reward fails to materialize (147). Cumulative evidence (148–151) points to the habenula as one of the regions that controls the decreases in firing of dopaminergic cells in VTA that may follow the failure to receive an expected reward (152). Thus, an enhanced sensitivity of the habenula, as a result of chronic drug exposures, could underlie a greater reactivity to drug cues when not followed by consumption of the drug or when the drug effects do not fulfil the expected reward outcome. Indeed, activation of the habenula, in animal models of cocaine addiction, has been associated with relapse to drug taking upon cue exposure (153,154). In the case of nicotine, a5 nicotinic receptors in the habenula appear to modulate the aversive responses to large doses of nicotine (155), and a5 and a2 receptors to modulate nicotine withdrawal (156). Because of the habenula’s opposite response to that of DA neurons with reward exposure (deactivation vs. activation) and its activation with exposure to aversive stimuli, we refer here to the signalling from the habenula as conveying an ‘antireward’ input.

The habenula appears to play a similar role with regards to food reward. A highly palatable food diet can induce obesity in rats, with the weight increases correlating with increases in m-opioid peptide binding in the basolateral and basomedial amygdala. Interestingly, the medial habenula showed significantly higher m-opioid peptide binding (by approximately 40%) after exposure to the palatable food in the rats that gained weight (those that consumed more food) but not in those that did not (157). This suggests that the habenula may be involved in over-eating when palatable food is available. Moreover, neurons in the rostromedial tegmental nucleus, which receive a major input from the lateral habenula, project to VTA DA neurons and are activated after food deprivation (158). These findings are consistent with a role for the habenula (both medial and lateral) in mediating responses to aversive stimuli or to states of deprivation such as during dieting or drug withdrawal.

The involvement of the habenula as an antireward hub within emotional networks is consistent with prior theoretical models of addiction that postulated that sensitized stress reactivity and negative mood (mediated through enhanced sensitivity of the amygdala and increased signalling although the corticotrophin-releasing factor) drives drug intake in addiction (159). Similar antireward responses (including increased stress reactivity, negative mood and discomfort) may also contribute to excessive food consumption in obesity and to the high propensity to relapse when dieting after exposure to a stressful or frustrating event.

In closing
The ability to resist the urge to use a drug or eat past the point of satiety requires the proper functioning of neuronal circuits involved in top-down control to oppose the conditioned responses that trigger the desire to ingest the food/ drug. Whether or not certain types of obesity should be defined as behavioural addictions (160), there are several identifiable circuits in the brain (2), whose dysfunctions uncover real and clinically meaningful parallels between the two disorders. The picture that is emerging is that obesity, similar to drug addiction (226), appears to result from imbalanced processing in a range of regions implicated in reward/saliency, motivation/drive, emotion/stress reactivity, memory/conditioning, executive function/self-control and interoception, in addition to possible imbalances in the homeostatic regulation of food intake.

The data accumulated so far suggests that it is the discrepancy between the expectation for the drug/food effects (conditioned responses) and the blunted reward experience that sustains drug taking/food overconsumption behaviour in an attempt to attain the expected reward. Also, whether tested during early or protracted periods of abstinence/ dieting, addicted/obese subjects show lower D2R in striatum (including NAc), which are associated with decreases in baseline activity in frontal brain regions implicated in salience attribution (OFC) and inhibitory control (ACC and DLPFC), whose disruption results in compulsivity and impulsivity. Finally, evidence has also surfaced about the role of interoceptive and aversive circuitry in the systemic imbalances that result in the compulsive intake of either drugs or food. As a consequence of sequential disruptions in these circuits, individuals may experience (i) an enhanced motivational value of the drug/food (secondary to learned associations through conditioning and habits) at the expense of other reinforcers (secondary to decreased sensitivity of the reward circuit), (ii) an impaired ability to inhibit the intentional (goal-directed) actions triggered by the strong desire to take the drug/food (secondary to impaired executive function) that result in compulsive drug/food taking and (iii) enhanced stress and ‘antireward reactivity’ that results in impulsive drug taking to escape the aversive state.

The many mechanistic and behavioural parallels identified between addiction and obesity suggest the value of multipronged parallel therapeutic approaches for both of these disorders. Such approaches should attempt to decrease the reinforcing properties of drug/food, re-establish/enhance the rewarding properties of alternative reinforcers, inhibit conditioned learned associations, enhance motivation for non-drug/food-related activities, decrease stress reactivity, improve mood and strengthen general-purpose self-control.


          Conflict of Interest Statement
        

No conflict of interest statement.

Abbreviations
D2Rdopamine 2 receptor

DAdopamine

NAcnucleus accumbens

Figure 1 Schematic representation of the highly interconnected system that affects the intake of food and drugs. It includes food-responsive peptides and hormones, energy homeostatic structures in the hypothalamus, the core of the dopamine reactive system in the ventral tegmental area and the striatum, and various cortical areas in charge of processing affect, motor and cognitive information. In contrast to drugs whose effects are exerted directly at the level of the brain reward dopamine pathway, food affects first multiple peripheral and central mechanisms that directly and indirectly convey information to the brain’s DA reward pathway. The hypothalamus plays a particularly prominent role in this regard although it is also strongly implicated in drug reward (225).

Figure 2 Obesity and addiction are complex bio-behavioural disorders that exist along various aetiological, pathological and physiological dimensions, all of which are likely to display some similarities as well as differences.

Figure 3 The nested bow tie architectures of complex systems allow for the input of a wide range of elements, be they nutrients (a) or rewarding stimuli (b), and produce a large variety of products/macromolecules (a) or goal-directed behaviours (b) using a relatively few intermediate common currencies. In this case, the common currencies that form the ‘knot’ of the bow tie are the various orexigenic/anorexigenic signals (a) and dopamine (b) (12) (slightly modified with permission from an original presentation by Dr. John Doyle).

Table 1 Peptides that regulate food intake can also influence the reinforcing effects of drugs of abuse

Endocrine hormones	Origin	Non-hypothalamic mechanism	Drugs/reward connection	
Orexigenic				
Ghrelin	Stomach	Amygdala, OFC, anterior insula, striatum
(161). Through the GHS-receptor 1a, ghrelin
also affects memory, learning and
neuroprotection (162).	Central ghrelin is required for alcohol reward
(163)	
Orexin	Lateral hypothalamus	Facilitates glutamate-dependent long-term
potentiation in VTA DA neurons (164)	Role in cocaine cue-induced reinstatement
(165) and in morphine-conditioned place
preference (166)	
Melanocortin	Hypothalamus	MC4R is co-expressed with the dopamine 1
receptor (D1R) in the ventral striatum (167).	Melanocortin receptor type 2 variants were
associated with a protective effect from
heroin addiction in Hispanics (168)	
Neuropeptide Y (NPY)	Hypothalamus	NPY receptors (Y1, Y2, Y4 and Y5) have
been found in various limbic structures,
which is consistent with its involvement in
obesity and in the regulation of emotional
states (169,170).	Plays a role in alcohol drinking, withdrawal
and dependence NPY modulates alcohol
dependence (163,171).	
Anorexigenic				
Leptin	Fat	Hypothalamic projections to VTA.
Also in insular cortex (172), NAc (173),
lateral septal nucleus, medial pre-optic area
and rostral linear nucleus (38,174).	Alcohol (175)
Leptin appears to play a critical role in
mesoaccumbens DA signalling, contributing
to also integrating non-feeding motivated
behaviours (176). Chronic ICV leptin infusion
in ad libitum fed rats reversibly potentiates
the rewarding effects of d-AMP (177).	
Insulin	Pancreas	Hypothalamic projections to VTA. Cognitive
regulation in the hippocampus (178).	Stimulants increased insulin levels in a
PCP-induced model of schizophrenia (179)	
Glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) (180)	Small intestine
Oral taste buds	Some anorexic effects appear to be exerted
at the level of the mesolimbic reward system
(181)	Exendin, a GLP-1 receptor agonist
modulates behavioural activation by
amphetamine (182)	
Cholecystokinin (CCK)	Small intestine (duodenal
and ileal cells).	CCK receptor distribution appears to
overlap significantly with that of the opioid
(183) and dopamine (184) systems in the
limbic system.	DA – CCK interactions in the Nucleus
accumbens contribute to psychostimulant
reward-related behaviours (185,186) (184).
Adult OLETF rats (CCK-1 KO) show altered
D2R signalling (NAc shell) similar to
drug-induced sensitization, suggesting a link
with their avidity for sucrose and abnormal
craving response (187).	
Peptide YY (PYY)	Endocrine cells of the
ileum and colon	Caudolateral OFC, ACC and ventral
striatum. High plasma PYY mimics the fed
state: changes in neural activity within the
caudolateral OFC predict feeding behaviour
independently of meal-related sensory
experiences. Under low PYY, hypothalamic
activation predicts food intake. After a meal
PPY switches food intake regulation from
homeostatic to hedonic (188),	(None found)	
Galanin (GAL)	CNS	Antinociceptive effects of galanin in the
nucleus accumbens (189) amygdala (190).
Potent modulator of serotonin
neurotransmission in the brain (191).	Alcohol, nicotine (192). GAL increases the
consumption of fat or alcohol which,
stimulates the expression of GAL, leading to
overconsumption (193).	
Cocaine- and amphetamine-
regulated transcript
(CART) (194)	Widely expressed in the
central nervous system	NAc shell. accumbal projections to lateral
hypothalamus (195)	Modulation of opioid-mesolimbic-dopamine
circuitry and or responses to cocaine and
amphetamine (196)	
Corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH)	Paraventricular nucleus
(PVN)	Amygdalar expression of CRH in the rat is
modulated by acute stress (197) and
cannabis dependence (198).	CRF receptors and stress-induced relapse
to cocaine (199) and alcohol (200).	
Oxytocin	Paraventricular nucleus
(PVN)	Oxytocin may modulate amygdalar
development and volume (201)	Oxytocin modulates methamphetamine
induced CPP: down (during extinction) or up
(during reinstatement) (202) .	
Table 2 Neurotransmitters implicated in drug-seeking behaviours that have also been found to influence food intake

Neurotransmitter	Origin	Mechanism	Drugs and food	
Dopamine	VTA, SN, hypothalamus	Enhances incentive salience, conditioning	All drugs
Increased prevalence of DRD2 Taq1A A1 allele
in obese patients with other drug dependencies
compared to non-abusing obese patients (203)	
Opioids	Throughout the brain	Hedonic responses, pain modulation.
Interacts with ghrelin and NPY1 to modulate food
reward (204)	All drugs most prominent heroin and opiate
analgesics
Endogenous opioids facilitate intake of sweet
and fat tastants (205). In a targeted study of
food addiction, the functional A118G
polymorphism of the muopioid receptor gene
was associated with binge eating disorders
(206)	
Cannabinoids	Throughout the brain	Reward and homeostatic regulation, short-term
and long-term synaptic plasticity throughout the
brain (207)	All drugs most prominent marihuana
Endocannabinoids interact with peripheral
signals, like leptin, insulin, ghrelin and satiety
hormones affecting energy balance and
adiposity (208)	
Serotonin	Raphe nuclei	Control of behavioural, perceptual (e.g. olfaction)
and regulatory systems, including mood, hunger,
body temp. Sexual behaviour, muscle control
and sensory perception. Hypothalamic control of
food intake (209)	Ecstasy, hallucinogens (LSD, mescaline,
psilocybin)
5-HT drugs reduce food intake in rodents in a
manner consistent with an enhancement of
satiety (210).	
Histamine	Tuberomamillary nucleus
(TMN) of the posterior
hypothalamus	Regulation of the sleep-wake cycle, appetite,
endocrine homeostasis, body temperature, pain
perception, learning, memory and emotion (211).	Alcohol and nicotine (212,213) (214).
Sustained histaminergic blockade in rats is
associated with decreased body weight (215).	
Cholinergic (216)	Nicotine receptors in
VTA and hypothalamus	Regulates activity in DA neurons and in MCH
neurons.
Nicotine administration into the lateral
hypothalamus significantly decreases food intake
(217)	Nicotine.
Hyperphagia: a major deterrent to smoking
cessation (218)	
Glutamate	Throughout the brain	Perception of pain, responses to the environment
and memory. Injection of glutamate into the
lateral hypothalamus elicits an intense feeding in
satiated rats (219)	All drugs most prominent PCP and ketamine
Selective stimulation of AMPAR in the LH is
sufficient to elicit feeding (220).	
GABA	Throughout the brain	Modulates striatal signalling from D1R and D2R
expressing neurons and modulates reactivity of
DA neurons in midbrain	Alcohol, opiates, inhalants, benzodiazepines
(171).
When released from leptin-inhibited neurons,
GABA can promote weight gain (221).	
Norepinephrine	Locus coeruleus	NE (like NPY and AGRP) reported to modulate
the circuitry of consummatory ingestive
responses via its actions in both hypothalamic
and hindbrain sites (222).	Memory to drugs (223)
Memories to food properties (224)	

   References
1 
            Volkow ND  
            O’Brien CP  
           Issues for DSM-V: should obesity be included as a brain disorder? Am J Psychiatry 2007 164 708 710 17475727 
2 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Fowler JS  
            Tomasi D  
            Baler R  
           Food and drug reward: overlapping circuits in human obesity and addiction Curr Top Behav Neurosci 2011 11 1 24 22016109 
3 
            Ziauddeen H  
            Fletcher P  
           Is food addiction a valid and useful concept? Obes Rev 2012 in press 
4 
            Spear HB  
           The growth of heroin addiction in the United Kingdom Br J Addict Alcohol Other Drugs 1969 64 245 255 5259111 
5 
            Goldstein A  
           Addiction: From Biology to Drug Policy 2001 2nd New York Oxford University Press 
6 
            Alamar B  
            Glantz SA  
           Modeling addictive consumption as an infectious disease Contrib Econ Analysis Policy 2006 5 1 22 21339848 
7 
            Koob GF  
            Le Moal M  
           Drug abuse: hedonic homeostatic dysregulation Science 1997 278 52 58 9311926 
8 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Fowler JS  
            Tomasi D  
            Telang F  
            Baler R  
           Addiction: decreased reward sensitivity and increased expectation sensitivity conspire to overwhelm the brain’s control circuit BioEssay 2010 32 748 755 
9 
            Umberg EN  
            Shader RI  
            Hsu LK  
            Greenblatt DJ  
           From disordered eating to addiction: the ‘food drug’ in bulimia nervosa J Clin Psychopharmacol 2012 32 376 389 22544008 
10 
            Speranza M  
            Revah-Levy A  
            Giquel L  
             
           An investigation of Goodman’s addictive disorder criteria in eating disorders Eur Eat Disord Rev 2011 20 182 189 21834026 
11 
            Schloegl H  
            Percik R  
            Horstmann A  
            Villringer A  
            Stumvoll M  
           Peptide hormones regulating appetite -focus on neuroimaging studies in humans Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2011 27 104 112 21294236 
12 
            Csete M  
            Doyle J  
           Bow ties, metabolism and disease Trends Biotechnol 2004 22 446 450 15331224 
13 
            Lenoir M  
            Serre F  
            Cantin L  
            Ahmed SH  
           Intense sweetness surpasses cocaine reward Plos ONE 2007 2 e698 17668074 
14 
            Avena NM  
            Rada P  
            Hoebel BG  
           Evidence for sugar addiction: behavioral and neurochemical effects of intermittent, excessive sugar intake Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2008 32 20 39 17617461 
15 
            Avena NM  
            Rada P  
            Hoebel BG  
           Sugar and fat bingeing have notable differences in addictive-like behavior J Nutr 2009 139 623 628 19176748 
16 
            Corsica JA  
            Pelchat ML  
           Food addiction: true or false? Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2010 26 165 169 20042860 
17 
            Garber AK  
            Lustig RH  
           Is fast food addictive? Curr Drug Abuse Rev 2011 4 146 162 21999689 
18 
            Atkinson TJ  
           Central and peripheral neuroendocrine peptides and signalling in appetite regulation: considerations for obesity pharmacotherapy Obes Rev 2008 9 108 120 18257752 
19 
            Cota D  
            Tschop MH  
            Horvath TL  
            Levine AS  
           Cannabinoids, opioids and eating behavior: the molecular face of hedonism? Brain Res Rev 2006 51 85 107 16364446 
20 
            Cason AM  
            Smith RJ  
            Tahsili-Fahadan P  
            Moorman DE  
            Sartor GC  
            Aston-Jones G  
           Role of orexin/hypocretin in reward-seeking and addiction: implications for obesity Physiol Behav 2010 100 419 428 20338186 
21 
            Dickson S  
            Shirazi RH  
            Hansson C  
            Bergquist F  
            Nissbrandt H  
            Skibicka KP  
           The glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) analogue, Exendin-4, decreases the rewarding value of food: a new role for mesolimbic GLP-1 receptors J Neurosci 2012 32 4812 4820 22492036 
22 
            Norgren R  
            Hajnal A  
            Mungarndee SS  
           Gustatory reward and the nucleus accumbens Physiol Behav 2006 89 531 535 16822531 
23 
            Opland DM  
            Leinninger GM  
            Myers MG Jr  
           Modulation of the mesolimbic dopamine system by leptin Brain Res 2011 1350 65 70 20417193 
24 
            Alhadeff AL  
            Rupprecht LE  
            Hayes MR  
           GLP-1 neurons in the nucleus of the solitary tract project directly to the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens to control for food intake Endocrinology 2012 153 647 658 22128031 
25 
            Rinaman L  
           Ascending projections from the caudal visceral nucleus of the solitary tract to brain regions involved in food intake and energy expenditure Brain Res 2010 1350 18 34 20353764 
26 
            Abizaid A  
            Liu ZW  
            Andrews ZB  
             
           Ghrelin modulates the activity and synaptic input organization of midbrain dopamine neurons while promoting appetite J Clin Invest 2006 116 3229 3239 17060947 
27 
            Jerlhag E  
            Egecioglu E  
            Dickson SL  
            Douhan A  
            Svensson L  
            Engel JA  
           Ghrelin administration into tegmental areas stimulates locomotor activity and increases extracellular concentration of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens Addict Biol 2007 12 6 16 17407492 
28 
            Figlewicz D  
            Evans SB  
            Murphy J  
            Hoen M  
            Myers M  
            Baskin DG  
           Expression of receptors for insulin and leptin in the ventral tegmental area/substantia nigra (VTA/SN) of the rat Brain Res 2003 964 107 115 12573518 
29 
            Leshan R  
            Opland DM  
            Louis GW  
             
           Ventral tegmental area leptin receptor neurons specifically project to and regulate cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript neurons of the extended central amygdala J Neurosci 2010 30 5713 5723 20410123 
30 
            Figlewicz D  
            Bennett JL  
            Aliakbari S  
            Zavosh A  
            Sipols AJ  
           Insulin acts at different CNS sites to decrease acute sucrose intake and sucrose self-administration in rats Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2008 295 R388 RR94 18525010 
31 
            Fadel J  
            Deutch AY  
           Anatomical substrates of orexin-dopamine interactions: lateral hypothalamic projections to the ventral tegmental area Neuroscience 2002 111 379 387 11983323 
32 
            Davis JF  
            Choi DL  
            Shurdak JD  
             
           Central melanocortins modulate mesocorticolimbic activity and food seeking behavior in the rat Physiol Behav 2011 102 491 495 21172367 
33 
            Davis JF  
            Tracy AL  
            Schurdak JD  
             
           Exposure to elevated levels of dietary fat attenuates psychostimulant reward and mesolimbic dopamine turnover in the rat Behav Neurosci 2008 122 1257 1263 19045945 
34 
            Wellman PJ  
            Nation JR  
            Davis KW  
           Impairment of acquisition of cocaine self-administration in rats maintained on a high-fat diet Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2007 88 89 93 17764729 
35 
            Bluml V  
            Kapusta N  
            Vyssoki B  
            Kogoj D  
            Walter H  
            Lesch OM  
           Relationship between substance use and body mass index in young males Am J Addict 2012 21 72 77 22211349 
36 
            Simon G  
            Von Korff M  
            Saunders K  
             
           Association between obesity and psychiatric disorders in the US adult population Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006 63 824 830 16818872 
37 
            Blendy JA  
            Strasser A  
            Walters CL  
             
           Reduced nicotine reward in obesity: cross-comparison in human and mouse Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2005 180 306 315 15719224 
38 
            Warren M  
            Frost-Pineda K  
            Gold M  
           Body mass index and marijuana use J Addict Dis 2005 24 95 100 16186086 
39 
            Davis JF  
            Choi DL  
            Benoit SC  
           Insulin, leptin and reward Trends Endocrinol Metab 2010 21 68 74 19818643 
40 
            Thanos PK  
            Michaelides M  
            Piyis YK  
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
           Food restriction markedly increases dopamine D2 receptor (D2R) in a rat model of obesity as assessed with in-vivo muPET imaging ([11C] raclopride) and in-vitro ([3H] spiperone) autoradiography Synapse 2008 62 50 61 17960763 
41 
            Dunn JP  
            Kessler RM  
            Feurer ID  
             
           Relationship of dopamine type 2 receptor binding potential with fasting neuroendocrine hormones and insulin sensitivity in human obesity Diabetes Care 2012 35 1105 1111 22432117 
42 
            Lent MR  
            Swencionis C  
           Addictive personality and maladaptive eating behaviors in adults seeking bariatric surgery Eat Behav 2012 13 67 70 22177401 
43 
            King WC  
            Chen JY  
            Mitchell JE  
             
           Prevalence of alcohol use disorders before and after bariatric surgery JAMA 2012 307 2516 2525 22710289 
44 
            Small DM  
            Jones-Gotman M  
            Dagher A  
           Feeding-induced dopamine release in dorsal striatum correlates with meal pleasantness ratings in healthy human volunteers Neuroimage 2003 19 1709 1715 12948725 
45 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Fowler JS  
            Telang F  
           Overlapping neuronal circuits in addiction and obesity: evidence of systems pathology Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2008 363 3191 3200 18640912 
46 
            Burger KS  
            Stice E  
           Frequent ice cream consumption is associated with reduced striatal response to receipt of an ice cream-based milkshake Am J Clin Nutr 2012 95 810 817 22338036 
47 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Baler RD  
           Reward, dopamine and the control of food intake: implications for obesity Trends Cogn Sci 2011 15 37 46 21109477 
48 
            Owesson-White CA  
            Ariansen J  
            Stuber GD  
             
           Neural encoding of cocaine-seeking behavior is coincident with phasic dopamine release in the accumbens core and shell Eur J Neurosci 2009 30 1117 1127 19735286 
49 
            Schultz W  
           Dopamine signals for reward value and risk: basic and recent data Behav Brain Funct 2010 6 24 20416052 
50 
            Robbins TW  
            Cador M  
            Taylor JR  
            Everitt BJ  
           Limbic-striatal interactions in reward-related processes Neurosci Biobehav Rev 1989 13 155 162 2682402 
51 
            Geisler S  
            Wise RA  
           Functional implications of glutamatergic projections to the ventral tegmental area Rev Neurosci 2008 19 227 244 19145985 
52 
            Liu T  
            Kong D  
            Shah BP  
             
           Fasting activation of AgRP neurons requires NMDA receptors and involves spinogenesis and increased excitatory tone Neuron 2012 73 511 522 22325203 
53 
            Petrovich GD  
           Forebrain circuits and control of feeding by learned cues Neurobiol Learn Mem 2010 95 152 158 20965265 
54 
            Lasseter HC  
            Wells AM  
            Xie X  
            Fuchs RA  
           Interaction of the basolateral amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex is critical for drug context-induced reinstatement of cocaine-seeking behavior in rats Neuropsychopharmacology 2011 36 711 720 21124303 
55 
            See RE  
           Neural substrates of cocaine-cue associations that trigger relapse Eur J Pharmacol 2005 526 140 146 16253228 
56 
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
            Telang F  
             
           Evidence of gender differences in the ability to inhibit brain activation elicited by food stimulation Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 1249 1254 19164587 
57 
            Volkow ND  
            Fowler JS  
            Wang GJ  
             
           Cognitive control of drug craving inhibits brain reward regions in cocaine abusers Neuroimage 2009 49 2536 2543 19913102 
58 
            Kearns DN  
            Gomez-Serrano MA  
            Tunstall BJ  
           A review of preclinical research demonstrating that drug and non-drug rein-forcers differentially affect behavior Curr Drug Abuse Rev 2011 4 261 269 21999697 
59 
            Rudenga KJ  
            Sinha R  
            Small DM  
           Acute stress potentiates brain response to milkshake as a function of body weight and chronic stress Int J Obes (Lond) 2012 [Epub ahead of print] 
60 
            Bragulat V  
            Dzemidzic M  
            Bruno C  
             
           Food-related odor probes of brain reward circuits during hunger: a pilot FMRI study Obesity (Silver Spring) 2012 18 1566 1571 20339365 
61 
            Stockburger J  
            Schmalzle R  
            Flaisch T  
            Bublatzky F  
            Schupp HT  
           The impact of hunger on food cue processing: an event-related brain potential study Neuroimage 2009 47 1819 1829 19409497 
62 
            Volkow ND  
            Fowler JS  
           Addiction, a disease of compulsion and drive: involvement of the orbitofrontal cortex Cereb Cortex 2000 10 318 325 10731226 
63 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Telang F  
             
           Low dopamine striatal D2 receptors are associated with prefrontal metabolism in obese subjects: possible contributing factors Neuroimage 2008 42 1537 1543 18598772 
64 
            Volkow ND  
            Fowler JS  
            Wang GJ  
            Baler R  
            Telang F  
           Imaging dopamine’s role in drug abuse and addiction Neuropharmacology 2009 56 Suppl. 1 3 8 18617195 
65 
            Thanos PK  
            Michaelides M  
            Benveniste H  
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
           Effects of chronic oral methylphenidate on cocaine self-administration and striatal dopamine D2 receptors in rodents Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2007 87 426 433 17599397 
66 
            Nader MA  
            Morgan D  
            Gage HD  
             
           PET imaging of dopamine D2 receptors during chronic cocaine self-administration in monkeys Nat Neurosci 2006 9 1050 1056 16829955 
67 
            Volkow ND  
            Chang L  
            Wang GJ  
             
           Low level of brain dopamine D2 receptors in methamphetamine abusers: association with metabolism in the orbitofrontal cortex Am J Psychiatry 2001 158 2015 2021 11729018 
68 
            Ferguson SM  
            Eskenazi D  
            Ishikawa M  
             
           Transient neuronal inhibition reveals opposing roles of indirect and direct pathways in sensitization Nat Neurosci 2011 14 22 24 21131952 
69 
            Thanos PK  
            Michaelides M  
            Umegaki H  
            Volkow ND  
           D2R DNA transfer into the nucleus accumbens attenuates cocaine self-administration in rats Synapse 2008 62 481 486 18418874 
70 
            Thanos PK  
            Volkow ND  
            Freimuth P  
             
           Overexpression of dopamine D2 receptors reduces alcohol self-administration J Neurochem 2001 78 1094 1103 11553683 
71 
            Ferguson SM  
            Eskenazi D  
            Ishikawa M  
             
           Transient neuronal inhibition reveals opposing roles of indirect and direct pathways in sensitization Nat Neurosci 2010 14 22 24 21131952 
72 
            Hikida T  
            Kimura K  
            Wada N  
            Funabiki K  
            Nakanishi S  
           Distinct roles of synaptic transmission in direct and indirect striatal pathways to reward and aversive behavior Neuron 2010 66 896 907 20620875 
73 
            Lobo MK  
            Covington HE3rd  
            Chaudhury D  
             
           Cell type-specific loss of BDNF signaling mimics optogenetic control of cocaine reward Science 2010 330 385 390 20947769 
74 
            Volkow ND  
            Fowler JS  
            Wang GJ  
             
           Decreased dopamine D2 receptor availability is associated with reduced frontal metabolism in cocaine abusers Synapse 1993 14 169 177 8101394 
75 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Telang F  
             
           Profound decreases in dopamine release in striatum in detoxified alcoholics: possible orbitofrontal involvement J Neurosci 2007 27 12700 12706 18003850 
76 
            Goldstein RZ  
            Volkow ND  
           Drug addiction and its underlying neurobiological basis: neuroimaging evidence for the involvement of the frontal cortex Am J Psychiatry 2002 159 1642 1652 12359667 
77 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Begleiter H  
             
           High levels of dopamine D2 receptors in unaffected members of alcoholic families: possible protective factors Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006 63 999 1008 16953002 
78 
            Ersche KD  
            Jones PS  
            Williams GB  
            Turton AJ  
            Robbins TW  
            Bullmore ET  
           Abnormal brain structure implicated in stimulant drug addiction Science 2012 335 601 604 22301321 
79 
            Parvaz MA  
            Maloney T  
            Moeller SJ  
             
           Sensitivity to monetary reward is most severely compromised in recently abstaining cocaine addicted individuals: a cross-sectional ERP study Psychiatry Res 2012 203 75 82 22841343 
80 
            Geiger BM  
            Haburcak M  
            Avena NM  
            Moyer MC  
            Hoebel BG  
            Pothos EN  
           Deficits of mesolimbic dopamine neurotransmission in rat dietary obesity Neuroscience 2009 159 1193 1199 19409204 
81 
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
            Logan J  
             
           Brain dopamine and obesity Lancet 2001 357 354 357 11210998 
82 
            de Weijer BA  
            van de Giessen E  
            van Amelsvoort TA  
             
           Lower striatal dopamine D2/3 receptor availability in obese compared with non-obese subjects EJNMMI Res 2012 1 37 22214469 
83 
            Steele KE  
            Prokopowicz GP  
            Schweitzer MA  
             
           Alterations of central dopamine receptors before and after gastric bypass surgery Obes Surg 2010 20 369 374 19902317 
84 
            Johnson PM  
            Kenny PJ  
           Dopamine D2 receptors in addictionlike reward dysfunction and compulsive eating in obese rats Nat Neurosci 2010 13 635 641 20348917 
85 
            Fineberg NA  
            Potenza MN  
            Chamberlain SR  
             
           Probing compulsive and impulsive behaviors, from animal models to endophenotypes: a narrative review Neuropsychopharmacology 2009 35 591 604 19940844 
86 
            Davis LM  
            Michaelides M  
            Cheskin LJ  
             
           Bromocriptine administration reduces hyperphagia and adiposity and differentially affects dopamine D2 receptor and transporter binding in leptin-receptor-deficient Zucker rats and rats with diet-induced obesity Neuroendocrinology 2009 89 152 162 18984941 
87 
            Holsen LM  
            Savage CR  
            Martin LE  
             
           Importance of reward and prefrontal circuitry in hunger and satiety: Prader-Willi syndrome vs. simple obesity Int J Obes (Lond) 2012 36 638 647 22024642 
88 
            Geiger BM  
            Behr GG  
            Frank LE  
             
           Evidence for defective mesolimbic dopamine exocytosis in obesity-prone rats FASEB J 2008 22 2740 2746 18477764 
89 
            Stoeckel LE  
            Weller RE  
            Cook EW3rd  
            Twieg DB  
            Knowlton RC  
            Cox JE  
           Widespread reward-system activation in obese women in response to pictures of high-calorie foods Neuroimage 2008 41 636 647 18413289 
90 
            Killgore WD  
            Yurgelun-Todd DA  
           Body mass predicts orbitofrontal activity during visual presentations of high-calorie foods Neuroreport 2005 16 859 863 15891585 
91 
            Stice E  
            Spoor S  
            Bohon C  
            Veldhuizen MG  
            Small DM  
           Relation of reward from food intake and anticipated food intake to obesity: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study J Abnorm Psychol 2008 117 924 935 19025237 
92 
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
            Felder C  
             
           Enhanced resting activity of the oral somatosensory cortex in obese subjects Neuroreport 2002 13 1151 1155 12151759 
93 
            Stice E  
            Spoor S  
            Bohon C  
            Small DM  
           Relation between obesity and blunted striatal response to food is moderated by TaqIA A1 allele Science 2008 322 449 452 18927395 
94 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Fowler JS  
             
           Decreased striatal dopaminergic responsiveness in detoxified cocaine-dependent subjects Nature 1997 386 830 833 9126741 
95 
            Wang GJ  
            Geliebter A  
            Volkow ND  
             
           Enhanced striatal dopamine release during food stimulation in binge eating disorder Obesity 2011 19 1601 1608 21350434 
96 
            Haltia LT  
            Rinne JO  
            Merisaari H  
             
           Effects of intravenous glucose on dopaminergic function in the human brain in vivo 
 Synapse 2007 61 748 756 17568412 
97 
            Willeumier KC  
            Taylor DV  
            Amen DG  
           Elevated BMI is associated with decreased blood flow in the prefrontal cortex using SPECT imaging in healthy adults Obesity (Silver Spring) 2011 19 1095 1097 21311507 
98 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Telang F  
             
           Inverse association between BMI and prefrontal metabolic activity in healthy adults Obesity 2009 17 60 65 18948965 
99 
            Bickel WK  
            Miller ML  
            Yi R  
            Kowal BP  
            Lindquist DM  
            Pitcock JA  
           Behavioral and neuroeconomics of drug addiction: competing neural systems and temporal discounting processes Drug Alcohol Depend 2007 90 Suppl. 1 S85 S91 17101239 
100 
            Brogan A  
            Hevey D  
            Pignatti R  
           Anorexia, bulimia, and obesity: shared decision making deficits on the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) J Int Neuropsychol Soc 2010 16 711 715 20406532 
101 
            Weller RE  
            Cook EW3rd  
            Avsar KB  
            Cox JE  
           Obese women show greater delay discounting than healthy-weight women Appetite 2008 51 563 569 18513828 
102 
            Kishinevsky FI  
            Cox JE  
            Murdaugh DL  
            Stoeckel LE  
            Cook EW3rd  
            Weller RE  
           fMRI reactivity on a delay discounting task predicts weight gain in obese women Appetite 2012 58 582 592 22166676 
103 
            Ikeda S  
            Kang MI  
            Ohtake F  
           Hyperbolic discounting, the sign effect, and the body mass index J Health Econ 2010 29 268 284 20167384 
104 
            Gregorios-Pippas L  
            Tobler PN  
            Schultz W  
           Short-term temporal discounting of reward value in human ventral striatum J Neurophysiol 2009 101 1507 1523 19164109 
105 
            Bjork JM  
            Momenan R  
            Hommer DW  
           Delay discounting correlates with proportional lateral frontal cortex volumes Biol Psychiatry 2009 65 710 713 19121516 
106 
            Bezzina G  
            Body S  
            Cheung TH  
             
           Effect of disconnecting the orbital prefrontal cortex from the nucleus accumbens core on inter-temporal choice behaviour: a quantitative analysis Behav Brain Res 2008 191 272 279 18472170 
107 
            Pine A  
            Shiner T  
            Seymour B  
            Dolan RJ  
           Dopamine, time, and impulsivity in humans J Neurosci 2010 30 8888 8896 20592211 
108 
            Salamone JD  
            Correa M  
            Farrar A  
            Mingote SM  
           Effort-related functions of nucleus accumbens dopamine and associated forebrain circuits Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2007 191 461 482 17225164 
109 
            Volkow N  
            Li TK  
           The neuroscience of addiction Nat Neurosci 2005 8 1429 1430 16251981 
110 
            Volkow ND  
            Fowler JS  
            Wang GJ  
           The addicted human brain: insights from imaging studies J Clin Invest 2003 111 1444 1451 12750391 
111 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Fowler JS  
             
           Association of methylphenidate-induced craving with changes in right striatoorbitofrontal metabolism in cocaine abusers: implications in addiction Am J Psychiatry 1999 156 19 26 9892293 
112 
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
            Fowler JS  
             
           Regional brain metabolic activation during craving elicited by recall of previous drug experiences Life Sci 1999 64 775 784 10075110 
113 
            Grant S  
            London ED  
            Newlin DB  
             
           Activation of memory circuits during cue-elicited cocaine craving Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 93 12040 12045 8876259 
114 
            Volkow ND  
            Wang GJ  
            Ma Y  
             
           Activation of orbital and medial prefrontal cortex by methylphenidate in cocaine-addicted subjects but not in controls: relevance to addiction J Neurosci 2005 25 3932 3939 15829645 
115 
            Rolls ET  
            McCabe C  
           Enhanced affective brain representations of chocolate in cravers vs. non-cravers Eur J Neurosci 2007 26 1067 1076 17714197 
116 
            Grabenhorst F  
            Rolls ET  
            Bilderbeck A  
           How cognition modulates affective responses to taste and flavor: top-down influences on the orbitofrontal and pregenual cingulate cortices Cereb Cortex 2008 18 1549 1559 18056086 
117 
            Wang GJ  
            Volkow ND  
            Telang F  
             
           Exposure to appetitive food stimuli markedly activates the human brain Neuroimage 2004 21 1790 1797 15050599 
118 
            Cox SM  
            Andrade A  
            Johnsrude IS  
           Learning to like: a role for human orbitofrontal cortex in conditioned reward J Neurosci 2005 25 2733 2740 15758183 
119 
            Gallagher M  
            McMahan RW  
            Schoenbaum G  
           Orbitofrontal cortex and representation of incentive value in associative learning J Neurosci 1999 19 6610 6614 10414988 
120 
            Weingarten HP  
           Conditioned cues elicit feeding in sated rats: a role for learning in meal initiation Science 1983 220 431 433 6836286 
121 
            Ogden J  
            Wardle J  
           Cognitive restraint and sensitivity to cues for hunger and satiety Physiol Behav 1990 47 477 481 2359756 
122 
            Machado CJ  
            Bachevalier J  
           The effects of selective amygdala, orbital frontal cortex or hippocampal formation lesions on reward assessment in nonhuman primates Eur J Neurosci 2007 25 2885 2904 17561849 
123 
            Maayan L  
            Hoogendoorn C  
            Sweat V  
            Convit A  
           Disinhibited eating in obese adolescents is associated with orbitofrontal volume reductions and executive dysfunction Obesity (Silver Spring) 2011 19 1382 1387 21350433 
124 
            Riggs NR  
            Huh J  
            Chou CP  
            Spruijt-Metz D  
            Pentz MA  
           Executive function and latent classes of childhood obesity risk J Behav Med 2012 in press 
125 
            Riggs NR  
            Spruijt-Metz D  
            Chou CP  
            Pentz MA  
           Relationships between executive cognitive function and lifetime substance use and obesity-related behaviors in fourth grade youth Child Neuropsychol 2012 18 1 11 21480013 
126 
            Walther K  
            Birdsill AC  
            Glisky EL  
            Ryan L  
           Structural brain differences and cognitive functioning related to body mass index in older females Hum Brain Mapp 2010 31 1052 1064 19998366 
127 
            Gazdzinski S  
            Kornak J  
            Weiner MW  
            Meyerhoff DJ  
           Body mass index and magnetic resonance markers of brain integrity in adults Ann Neurol 2008 63 652 657 18409192 
128 
            Pannacciulli N  
            Del Parigi A  
            Chen K  
            Le DS  
            Reiman EM  
            Tataranni PA  
           Brain abnormalities in human obesity: a voxel-based morphometric study Neuroimage 2006 31 1419 1425 16545583 
129 
            Haltia LT  
            Viljanen A  
            Parkkola R  
             
           Brain white matter expansion in human obesity and the recovering effect of dieting J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007 92 3278 3284 17536002 
130 
            DelParigi A  
            Chen K  
            Salbe AD  
             
           Successful dieters have increased neural activity in cortical areas involved in the control of behavior Int J Obes (Lond) 2007 31 440 448 16819526 
131 
            Bonson KR  
            Grant SJ  
            Contoreggi CS  
             
           Neural systems and cue-induced cocaine craving Neuropsychopharmacology 2002 26 376 386 11850152 
132 
            Pelchat ML  
            Johnson A  
            Chan R  
            Valdez J  
            Ragland JD  
           Images of desire: food-craving activation during fMRI Neuroimage 2004 23 1486 1493 15589112 
133 
            Wang Z  
            Faith M  
            Patterson F  
             
           Neural substrates of abstinence-induced cigarette cravings in chronic smokers J Neurosci 2007 27 14035 14040 18094242 
134 
            Naqvi NH  
            Rudrauf D  
            Damasio H  
            Bechara A  
           Damage to the insula disrupts addiction to cigarette smoking Science 2007 315 531 534 17255515 
135 
            Naqvi NH  
            Bechara A  
           The hidden island of addiction: the insula Trends Neurosci 2009 32 56 67 18986715 
136 
            Clark L  
            Bechara A  
            Damasio H  
            Aitken MR  
            Sahakian BJ  
            Robbins TW  
           Differential effects of insular and ventromedial pre-frontal cortex lesions on risky decision-making Brain 2008 131 1311 1322 18390562 
137 
            Janes AC  
            Pizzagalli DA  
            Richardt S  
             
           Brain reactivity to smoking cues prior to smoking cessation predicts ability to maintain tobacco abstinence Biol Psychiatry 2010 67 722 729 20172508 
138 
            Rolls ET  
           Functions of the orbitofrontal and pregenual cingulate cortex in taste, olfaction, appetite and emotion Acta Physiol Hung 2008 95 131 164 18642756 
139 
            Craig AD  
           Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body Curr Opin Neurobiol 2003 13 500 505 12965300 
140 
            Wang GJ  
            Tomasi D  
            Backus W  
             
           Gastric distention activates satiety circuitry in the human brain Neuroimage 2008 39 1824 1831 18155924 
141 
            Tomasi D  
            Wang GJ  
            Wang R  
             
           Association of body mass and brain activation during gastric distention: implications for obesity Plos ONE 2009 4 e6847 19718256 
142 
            Hajnal A  
            Norgren R  
           Taste pathways that mediate accumbens dopamine release by sapid sucrose Physiol Behav 2005 84 363 369 15763573 
143 
            DelParigi A  
            Chen K  
            Salbe AD  
            Reiman EM  
            Tataranni PA  
           Sensory experience of food and obesity: a positron emission tomography study of the brain regions affected by tasting a liquid meal after a prolonged fast Neuroimage 2005 24 436 443 15627585 
144 
            Frank GK  
            Oberndorfer TA  
            Simmons AN  
             
           Sucrose activates human taste pathways differently from artificial sweetener Neuroimage 2008 39 1559 1569 18096409 
145 
            Wagner A  
            Aizenstein H  
            Mazurkewicz L  
             
           Altered insula response to taste stimuli in individuals recovered from restricting-type anorexia nervosa Neuropsychopharmacology 2008 33 513 523 17487228 
146 
            Nummenmaa L  
            Hirvonen J  
            Hannukainen JC  
             
           Dorsal striatum and its limbic connectivity mediate abnormal anticipatory reward processing in obesity Plos ONE 2012 7 e31089 22319604 
147 
            Schultz W  
            Dayan P  
            Montague PR  
           A neural substrate of prediction and reward Science 1997 275 1593 1599 9054347 
148 
            Matsumoto M  
            Hikosaka O  
           Lateral habenula as a source of negative reward signals in dopamine neurons Nature 2007 447 1111 1115 17522629 
149 
            Christoph GR  
            Leonzio RJ  
            Wilcox KS  
           Stimulation of the lateral habenula inhibits dopamine-containing neurons in the sub-stantia nigra and ventral tegmental area of the rat J Neurosci 1986 6 613 619 3958786 
150 
            Lisoprawski A  
            Herve D  
            Blanc G  
            Glowinski J  
            Tassin JP  
           Selective activation of the mesocortico-frontal dopaminergic neurons induced by lesion of the habenula in the rat Brain Res 1980 183 229 234 7357405 
151 
            Nishikawa T  
            Fage D  
            Scatton B  
           Evidence for, and nature of, the tonic inhibitory influence of habenulointerpeduncular pathways upon cerebral dopaminergic transmission in the rat Brain Res 1986 373 324 336 2424555 
152 
            Kimura M  
            Satoh T  
            Matsumoto N  
           What does the habenula tell dopamine neurons? Nat Neurosci 2007 10 677 678 17525761 
153 
            Zhang F  
            Zhou W  
            Liu H  
             
           Increased c-Fos expression in the medial part of the lateral habenula during cue-evoked heroin-seeking in rats Neurosci Lett 2005 386 133 137 16002220 
154 
            Brown RM  
            Short JL  
            Lawrence AJ  
           Identification of brain nuclei implicated in cocaine-primed reinstatement of conditioned place preference: a behaviour dissociable from sensitization Plos ONE 2011 5 e15889 21209913 
155 
            Fowler CD  
            Lu Q  
            Johnson PM  
            Marks MJ  
            Kenny PJ  
           Habenular alpha5 nicotinic receptor subunit signalling controls nicotine intake Nature 2011 471 597 601 21278726 
156 
            Salas R  
            Sturm R  
            Boulter J  
            De Biasi M  
           Nicotinic receptors in the habenulointerpeduncular system are necessary for nicotine withdrawal in mice J Neurosci 2009 29 3014 3018 19279237 
157 
            Smith SL  
            Harrold JA  
            Williams G  
           Diet-induced obesity increases mu opioid receptor binding in specific regions of the rat brain Brain Res 2002 953 215 222 12384255 
158 
            Jhou TC  
            Fields HL  
            Baxter MG  
            Saper CB  
            Holland PC  
           The rostromedial tegmental nucleus (RMTg), a GABAergic afferent to midbrain dopamine neurons, encodes aversive stimuli and inhibits motor responses Neuron 2009 61 786 800 19285474 
159 
            Koob GF  
            Le Moal M  
           Addiction and the brain antireward system Annu Rev Psychol 2008 59 29 53 18154498 
160 
            Ziauddeen H  
            Farooqi IS  
            Fletcher PC  
           Obesity and the brain: how convincing is the addiction model? Nat Rev Neurosci 2012 13 279 286 22414944 
161 
            Malik S  
            McGlone F  
            Bedrossian D  
            Dagher A  
           Ghrelin modulates brain activity in areas that control appetitive behavior Cell Metab 2008 7 400 409 18460331 
162 
            Albarran-Zeckler RG  
            Sun Y  
            Smith RG  
           Physiological roles revealed by ghrelin and ghrelin receptor deficient mice Peptides 2011 32 2229 2235 21781995 
163 
            Leggio L  
            Addolorato G  
            Cippitelli A  
            Jerlhag E  
            Kampov-Polevoy AB  
            Swift RM  
           Role of feeding-related pathways in alcohol dependence: a focus on sweet preference, NPY, and ghrelin Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2011 35 194 202 21058960 
164 
            Aston-Jones G  
            Smith RJ  
            Sartor GC  
             
           Lateral hypothalamic orexin/hypocretin neurons: a role in reward-seeking and addiction Brain Res 2010 1314 74 90 19815001 
165 
            James MH  
            Charnley JL  
            Levi EM  
             
           Orexin-1 receptor signalling within the ventral tegmental area, but not the paraventricular thalamus, is critical to regulating cue-induced reinstatement of cocaine-seeking Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2011 14 684 690 21447232 
166 
            Harris GC  
            Wimmer M  
            Randall-Thompson JF  
            Aston-Jones G  
           Lateral hypothalamic orexin neurons are critically involved in learning to associate an environment with morphine reward Behav Brain Res 2007 183 43 51 17599478 
167 
            Cui H  
            Mason BL  
            Lee C  
            Nishi A  
            Elmquist JK  
            Lutter M  
           Melanocortin 4 receptor signaling in dopamine 1 receptor neurons is required for procedural memory learning Physiol Behav 2012 106 201 210 22342812 
168 
            Proudnikov D  
            Hamon S  
            Ott J  
            Kreek MJ  
           Association of polymorphisms in the melanocortin receptor type 2 (MC2R, ACTH receptor) gene with heroin addiction Neurosci Lett 2008 435 234 239 18359160 
169 
            Sajdyk TJ  
            Shekhar A  
            Gehlert DR  
           Interactions between NPY and CRF in the amygdala to regulate emotionality Neuropeptides 2004 38 225 234 15337374 
170 
            Wu G  
            Feder A  
            Wegener G  
             
           Central functions of neuropeptide Y in mood and anxiety disorders Expert Opin Ther Targets 2011 15 1317 1331 21995655 
171 
            Gilpin NW  
            Roberto M  
           Neuropeptide modulation of central amygdala neuroplasticity is a key mediator of alcohol dependence Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2012 36 873 888 22101113 
172 
            Baicy K  
            London ED  
            Monterosso J  
             
           Leptin replacement alters brain response to food cues in genetically leptin-deficient adults Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 104 18276 18279 17986612 
173 
            Farooqi IS  
            Bullmore E  
            Keogh J  
            Gillard J  
            O’Rahilly S  
            Fletcher PC  
           Leptin regulates striatal regions and human eating behavior Science 2007 317 1355 17690262 
174 
            Scott MM  
            Lachey JL  
            Sternson SM  
             
           Leptin targets in the mouse brain J Comp Neurol 2009 514 518 532 19350671 
175 
            Pravdova E  
            Macho L  
            Fickova M  
           Alcohol intake modifies leptin, adiponectin and resistin serum levels and their mRNA expressions in adipose tissue of rats Endocr Regul 2009 43 117 125 19817506 
176 
            Fulton S  
            Pissios P  
            Manchon RP  
             
           Leptin regulation of the mesoaccumbens dopamine pathway Neuron 2006 51 811 822 16982425 
177 
            Carr KD  
           Chronic food restriction: enhancing effects on drug reward and striatal cell signaling Physiol Behav 2007 91 459 472 17081571 
178 
            Costello DA  
            Claret M  
            Al-Qassab H  
             
           Brain deletion of insulin receptor substrate 2 disrupts hippocampal synaptic plasticity and metaplasticity Plos ONE 2012 7 e31124 22383997 
179 
            Ernst A  
            Ma D  
            Garcia-Perez I  
             
           Molecular validation of the acute phencyclidine rat model for schizophrenia: identification of translational changes in energy metabolism and neurotransmission J Proteome Res 2012 11 3704 3714 22613019 
180 
            Dube PE  
            Brubaker PL  
           Nutrient, neural and endocrine control of glucagon-like peptide secretion Horm Metab Res 2004 36 755 760 15655704 
181 
            Dickson SL  
            Shirazi RH  
            Hansson C  
            Bergquist F  
            Nissbrandt H  
            Skibicka KP  
           The glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) analogue, Exendin-4, decreases the rewarding value of food: a new role for mesolimbic GLP-1 receptors J Neurosci 2012 32 4812 4820 22492036 
182 
            Erreger K  
            Davis AR  
            Poe AM  
            Greig NH  
            Stanwood GD  
            Galli A  
           Exendin-4 decreases amphetamine-induced locomotor activity Physiol Behav 2012 106 574 578 22465309 
183 
            Hebb AL  
            Poulin JF  
            Roach SP  
            Zacharko RM  
            Drolet G  
           Cholecystokinin and endogenous opioid peptides: interactive influence on pain, cognition, and emotion Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005 29 1225 1238 16242828 
184 
            Beinfeld MC  
           What we know and what we need to know about the role of endogenous CCK in psychostimulant sensitization Life Sci 2003 73 643 654 12801586 
185 
            Vaccarino FJ  
           Nucleus accumbens dopamine-CCK interactions in psychostimulant reward and related behaviors Neurosci Biobehav Rev 1994 18 207 214 7914685 
186 
            Crawley JN  
           Cholecystokinin potentiates dopamine-mediated behaviors in the nucleus accumbens, a site of CCK-DA co-existence Psychopharmacol Bull 1985 21 523 527 4034868 
187 
            Marco A  
            Schroeder M  
            Weller A  
           Feeding and reward: ontogenetic changes in an animal model of obesity Neuropharmacology 2012 62 2447 2454 22401956 
188 
            Batterham RL  
            Ffytche DH  
            Rosenthal JM  
             
           PYY modulation of cortical and hypothalamic brain areas predicts feeding behaviour in humans Nature 2007 450 106 109 17934448 
189 
            Xu SL  
            Li J  
            Zhang JJ  
            Yu LC  
           Antinociceptive effects of galanin in the nucleus accumbens of rats Neurosci Lett 2012 520 43 46 22595465 
190 
            Jin WY  
            Liu Z  
            Liu D  
            Yu LC  
           Antinociceptive effects of galanin in the central nucleus of amygdala of rats, an involvement of opioid receptors Brain Res 2010 1320 16 21 20051236 
191 
            Ogren SO  
            Razani H  
            Elvander-Tottie E  
            Kehr J  
           The neuropeptide galanin as an in vivo  modulator of brain 5-HT1A receptors: possible relevance for affective disorders Physiol Behav 2007 92 172 179 17585970 
192 
            Morganstern I  
            Barson JR  
            Leibowitz SF  
           Regulation of drug and palatable food overconsumption by similar peptide systems Curr Drug Abuse Rev 2011 4 163 173 21999690 
193 
            Barson JR  
            Morganstern I  
            Leibowitz SF  
           Galanin and consummatory behavior: special relationship with dietary fat, alcohol and circulating lipids EXS 2011 102 87 111 21299064 
194 
            Fekete C  
            Lechan RM  
           Neuroendocrine implications for the association between cocaine- and amphetamine regulated transcript (CART) and hypophysiotropic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) Peptides 2006 27 2012 2018 16730860 
195 
            Millan EZ  
            Furlong TM  
            McNally GP  
           Accumbens shell-hypothalamus interactions mediate extinction of alcohol seeking J Neurosci 2010 30 4626 4635 20357113 
196 
            Upadhya MA  
            Nakhate KT  
            Kokare DM  
            Singh U  
            Singru PS  
            Subhedar NK  
           CART peptide in the nucleus accumbens shell acts downstream to dopamine and mediates the reward and reinforcement actions of morphine Neuropharmacology 2012 62 1823 1833 22186082 
197 
            Zambello E  
            Jimenez-Vasquez PA  
            El Khoury A  
            Mathe AA  
            Caberlotto L  
           Acute stress differentially affects corticotropin-releasing hormone mRNA expression in the central amygdala of the ‘depressed’ flinders sensitive line and the control flinders resistant line rats Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2008 32 651 661 18077069 
198 
            Caberlotto L  
            Rimondini R  
            Hansson A  
            Eriksson S  
            Heilig M  
           Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) mRNA expression in rat central amygdala in cannabinoid tolerance and withdrawal: evidence for an allostatic shift? Neuropsychopharmacology 2004 29 15 22 12968131 
199 
            Cippitelli A  
            Damadzic R  
            Singley E  
             
           Pharmacological blockade of corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 (CRH1R) reduces voluntary consumption of high alcohol concentrations in non-dependent Wistar rats Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2012 100 522 529 22036774 
200 
            Le Strat Y  
            Dubertret C  
           [The role of genetic factors on the link between stress and alcohol use: the example of CRH-R1] Presse Med 2012 41 32 36 21752573 
201 
            Inoue H  
            Yamasue H  
            Tochigi M  
             
           Association between the oxytocin receptor gene and amygdalar volume in healthy adults Biol Psychiatry 2010 68 1066 1072 20832055 
202 
            Subiah CO  
            Mabandla MV  
            Phulukdaree A  
            Chuturgoon AA  
            Daniels WM  
           The effects of vasopressin and oxytocin on methamphetamine-induced place preference behaviour in rats Metab Brain Dis 2012 27 341 350 22447521 
203 
            Blum K  
            Braverman ER  
            Wood RC  
             
           Increased prevalence of the Taq I A1 allele of the dopamine receptor gene (DRD2) in obesity with comorbid substance use disorder: a preliminary report Pharmacogenetics 1996 6 297 305 8873216 
204 
            Skibicka KP  
            Shirazi RH  
            Hansson C  
            Dickson SL  
           Ghrelin interacts with neuropeptide Y Y1 and opioid receptors to increase food reward Endocrinology 2012 153 1194 1205 22210742 
205 
            Olszewski PK  
            Alsio J  
            Schioth HB  
            Levine AS  
           Opioids as facilitators of feeding: can any food be rewarding? Physiol Behav 2011 104 105 110 21536057 
206 
            Davis CA  
            Levitan RD  
            Reid C  
             
           Dopamine for ‘wanting’ and opioids for ‘liking’: a comparison of obese adults with and without binge eating Obesity (Silver Spring) 2009 17 1220 1225 19282821 
207 
            Katona I  
            Freund TF  
           Multiple functions of endocannabinoid signaling in the brain Annu Rev Neurosci 2012 35 529 558 22524785 
208 
            Bermudez-Silva FJ  
            Cardinal P  
            Cota D  
           The role of the endocannabinoid system in the neuroendocrine regulation of energy balance J Psychopharmacol 2011 26 114 124 21824982 
209 
            Leibowitz SF  
            Alexander JT  
           Hypothalamic serotonin in control of eating behavior, meal size, and body weight Biol Psychiatry 1998 44 851 864 9807640 
210 
            Halford JC  
            Harrold JA  
           5-HT(2C) receptor agonists and the control of appetite Handb Exp Pharmacol 2012 209 349 356 22249823 
211 
            Blandina P  
            Munari L  
            Provensi G  
            Passani MB  
           Histamine neurons in the tuberomamillary nucleus: a whole center or distinct subpopulations? Front Syst Neurosci 2012 6 33 22586376 
212 
            Nuutinen S  
            Lintunen M  
            Vanhanen J  
            Ojala T  
            Rozov S  
            Panula P  
           Evidence for the role of histamine H3 receptor in alcohol consumption and alcohol reward in mice Neuropsychopharmacology 2011 36 2030 2040 21654737 
213 
            Galici R  
            Rezvani AH  
            Aluisio L  
             
           JNJ-39220675, a novel selective histamine H3 receptor antagonist, reduces the abuse-related effects of alcohol in rats Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2011 214 829 841 21086115 
214 
            Miszkiel J  
            Kruk M  
            McCreary AC  
            Przegalinski E  
            Biala G  
            Filip M  
           Effects of the histamine (H)3 receptor antagonist ABT-239 on acute and repeated nicotine locomotor responses in rats Pharmacol Rep 2011 63 1553 1559 22358104 
215 
            Malmlof K  
            Zaragoza F  
            Golozoubova V  
             
           Influence of a selective histamine H3 receptor antagonist on hypothalamic neural activity, food intake and body weight Int J Obes (Lond) 2005 29 1402 1412 16151415 
216 
            Jo Y  
            Talmage D  
            Role L  
           Nicotinic receptor-mediated effects on appetite and food intake J Neurobiol 2002 53 618 632 12436425 
217 
            Miyata G  
            Meguid MM  
            Fetissov SO  
            Torelli GF  
            Kim HJ  
           Nicotine’s effect on hypothalamic neurotransmitters and appetite regulation Surgery 1999 126 255 263 10455892 
218 
            White MA  
            Masheb RM  
            Grilo CM  
           Self-reported weight gain following smoking cessation: a function of binge eating behavior Int J Eat Disord 2009 43 572 575 19718662 
219 
            Stanley BG  
            Willett VL3rd  
            Donias HW  
            Ha LH  
            Spears LC  
           The lateral hypothalamus: a primary site mediating excitatory amino acid-elicited eating Brain Res 1993 630 41 49 7509711 
220 
            Hettes SR  
            Gonzaga WJ  
            Heyming TW  
            Nguyen JK  
            Perez S  
            Stanley BG  
           Stimulation of lateral hypothalamic AMPA receptors may induce feeding in rats Brain Res 2010 1346 112 120 20580634 
221 
            Xu Y  
            O’Brien WG3rd  
            Lee CC  
            Myers MG Jr  
            Tong Q  
           Role of GABA release from leptin receptor-expressing neurons in body weight regulation Endocrinology 2012 153 2223 2233 22334723 
222 
            Taylor K  
            Lester E  
            Hudson B  
            Ritter S  
           Hypothalamic and hindbrain NPY, AGRP and NE increase consummatory feeding responses Physiol Behav 2007 90 744 750 17289093 
223 
            Otis JM  
            Mueller D  
           Inhibition of beta-adrenergic receptors induces a persistent deficit in retrieval of a cocaine-associated memory providing protection against reinstatement Neuropsychopharmacology 2011 9 1912 1920 21544069 
224 
            Miranda MI  
            LaLumiere RT  
            Buen TV  
            Bermudez-Rattoni F  
            McGaugh JL  
           Blockade of noradrenergic receptors in the basolateral amygdala impairs taste memory Eur J Neurosci 2003 18 2605 2610 14622162 
225 
            Gutierrez R  
            Lobo MK  
            Zhang F  
            de Lecea L  
           Neural integration of reward, arousal, and feeding: recruitment of VTA, lateral hypothalamus, and ventral striatal neurons IUBMB Life 2011 63 824 830 21901814 
226 
            Carnell S  
            Gibson C  
            Benson L  
            Ochner CN  
            Geliebter A  
           Neuroimaging and obesity: current knowledge and future directions Obes Rev 2011 13 43 56 21902800 

