LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10123317032527Cell MetabCell Metab.Cell metabolism1550-41311932-742028467927557687210.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.002NIHMS867419ArticleAstrocytic process plasticity and IKKβ/NF-κB in central control of blood glucose, blood pressure and body weight Zhang Yalin Reichel Judith M. Han Cheng Zuniga-Hertz Juan Pablo Cai Dongsheng *Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Diabetes Research Center, Institute of Aging, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461* Correspondence Author and Lead Contact: Dongsheng Cai, MD, PhD, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Phone: 718-430-2426, Fax: 718-430-8922, dongsheng.cai@einstein.yu.edu29 4 2017 02 5 2017 02 5 2018 25 5 1091 1102.e4 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Summary
Central regulation of metabolic physiology is mediated critically through neuronal functions; however, if astrocytes are also essential remains unclear. Here we show that the high-order processes of astrocytes in the mediobasal hypothalamus displayed shortening in fasting while elongation in fed status. Chronic overnutrition and astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation similarly impaired astrocytic plasticity leading to sustained shortening of high-order processes. In physiology, astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation resulted in early-onset effects including glucose intolerance and blood pressure rise and late-onset effects including body weight and fat gain. Appropriate inhibition in astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB protected against chronic overnutrition from impairing astrocytic plasticity and these physiological functions. Mechanistically, astrocytic regulation of hypothalamic extracellular GABA level and therefore BDNF expression were found partly accountable. Hence, astrocytic process plasticity and IKKβ/NF-κB play significant roles in central control of blood glucose, blood pressure and body weight as well as the central induction of these physiological disorders leading to disease.

eTOC blurb
XXX et al report that astrocytes can actively respond to metabolic information such as fasting/refeeding and chronic over-nutrition by dynamically changing their process length and density. Chronic overnutrition inflames astrocytes, thus impairing their plasticity and resulting in changes in extracellular neurotransmitter levels and downstream neuropeptides, which affect metabolism.




AstrocytehypothalamusIKKβNF-κBinflammationblood glucoseblood pressureobesitydiabetes
   Introduction
Hypothalamic neurons are important for the regulation of feeding behavior and related metabolic physiology (Cone, 2005; Dietrich and Horvath, 2011; Flier and Maratos-Flier, 1998; Munzberg and Myers, 2005; Schwartz et al., 2000; Tschop et al., 2006). To understand the regulatory functions of hypothalamic neurons, for example, through secretion of various neuropeptides or formation of various neural circuits, has been a major focus of research including many studies during recent years (Chiappini et al., 2014; Cohen et al., 2001; Coppari et al., 2005; Flak et al., 2014; Ghamari-Langroudi et al., 2015; Kievit et al., 2006; Kitamura et al., 2006; Kleinridders et al., 2013; Lam et al., 2005; Zeltser et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2008). In contrast to neurons, astrocytes have not received adequate attention, despite that they are not only the most abundant neural cells but display remarkably high diversities in morphology and functions (Eroglu and Barres, 2010; Fields and Stevens-Graham, 2002; Garcia-Caceres et al., 2016; Ishibashi et al., 2006; Muroyama et al., 2005; Muthukumar et al., 2014; Nedergaard et al., 2003; Perea et al., 2014; Rangroo Thrane et al., 2013; Shigetomi et al., 2012; Theodosis et al., 2008; Wyss-Coray et al., 2003). Astrocytes and neurons are strongly interconnected and the astrocyte-to-neuron ratio surges with increased complexity of the brain (Nedergaard et al., 2003). Previous studies have shown that astrocytes secret cytokines and neurotrophic factors to promote neuronal development and plasticity, to modulate synaptic excitation through uptake and release of neurotransmitters, and to maintain various types of homeostasis in brain tissues (Eroglu and Barres, 2010; Jo et al., 2014; Otsu et al., 2015; Rangroo Thrane et al., 2013; Schachtrup et al., 2015; Shigetomi et al., 2012). Also, astrocytes can influence the brain’s metabolic condition by controlling glycogen storages and supplying fuel to neurons (Belanger et al., 2011; Choi et al., 2012), and it has been reported that hypothalamic astrocytes can sense glucose via glucose transporter-2, and register leptin signaling via leptin receptor (Fuente-Martin et al., 2012; Marty et al., 2005). Recently, hypothalamic astrocyte processes were found to change in response to leptin (Kim et al., 2014), and lack of insulin signaling in astrocytes can alter the processes and brain glucose uptake (Garcia-Caceres et al., 2016). From disease perspective, high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity in mice has been shown to be associated with hypothalamic astrogliosis (Thaler et al., 2012). Despite these observations, the role of astrocytes in hypothalamic control of metabolic physiology or disease still remains undetermined.

As known, the majority of astrocytic regulatory functions rely on their astrocytic processes (Haydon and Carmignoto, 2006; Kimelberg and Nedergaard, 2010). Indeed, the processes of astrocytes are interspersed between neurons, shrouding neuronal somata, synapses and dendrites (Theodosis et al., 2008). Astrocytes also express numerous transporters and receptors that are mainly localized in these processes (Chung et al., 2013; Minelli et al., 1996; Muthukumar et al., 2014; Shigetomi et al., 2012). The coating of neurons by astrocyte processes facilitates the containment of ions and neurotransmitters within neurons; such a close connection is necessary for proper functioning of neurons (Sykova, 2004). Notably, the astrocyte coat is sensitive to changing conditions, rendering astrocyte plasticity to play as a key part in regulating neuronal function (Theodosis et al., 2008). Rapid astrocyte process remodeling in certain areas of the hypothalamus has been observed in the context of reproductive physiology, for instance, changing estrogen levels in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) affect the coating of neurons by astrocyte processes (Garcia-Segura et al., 1994). Moreover, in the primate preoptic hypothalamic area, the astrocyte coating of neurons that secret gonadotropin-releasing hormone is closely connected to plasma steroid levels (Garcia-Segura et al., 1994; Witkin et al., 1991). In this work, we studied if hypothalamic astrocytic process plasticity could be involved in metabolic regulation and/or disease development, and if so, how.

Results
Hypothalamic astrocytes change high-order processes according to nutrition
Grounded at the critical role by the hypothalamus in regulation of metabolic physiology, several years ago we started to study if hypothalamic astrocytes might dynamically alter their morphology and particularly their detailed processes according to nutritional changes. Because conventional approaches, such as immunostaining of glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), hardly reveal high-order details of astrocytic processes, we resorted to Golgi staining which has been used to study the detailed branches of neural cells including astrocytes (Alvarez et al., 2015; Grosche et al., 2013; Hama et al., 2004; Marin-Padilla, 1995; Ogata and Kosaka, 2002; Sullivan et al., 2010). In 2012, Ranjan et al modified Golgi staining protocol so that it preferentially stains glial cells, predominantly astrocytes (Ranjan and Mallick, 2012). We further optimized this protocol and were able to stain a significant number of astrocytes which were easily identifiable among other cell types based on their distinct characteristics in morphology (Fig. S1). Astrocytes were sporadically and randomly stained by this chemical method, usually without being staggered together, which made it technically feasible to track individual astrocytes and their own processes. In our experiment, adult chow-fed C57BL/6 mice under ad-libitum feeding condition were compared to overnight fasting. Astrocytes in the mediobasal hypothalamus (MBH) which comprises the ARC and the ventral medial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) were intensively examined. Despite that the domain sizes of astrocytes in the ARC were smaller than those in the VMH, high-order processes of these cells in both subregions from fasting condition were shorter and less dense compared to those from ad-libitum fed condition (Fig. 1A–D, Fig. S2A). Following fasting, astrocytes showed significant decreases in the length of branches from order 4 to 8 in the ARC and from order 4 to 11 in the VMH, and decreases in the numbers of intersections across the Scholl radii of 6–14 μm in the ARC and 20–52 μm in the VMH. Such nutritional condition-dependent plastic changes in astrocytes were observed in the MBH but negligibly found in other brain regions such as the cortex in the same sections (Fig. 1E, F). Along this line, we examined mice which were maintained chronically under a normal chow versus an HFD, the latter resulting in obesity and associated metabolic disorders. Of interest, shortening of hypothalamic astrocytic high-order processes was sustained in HFD-fed mice while reversed in chow-fed mice when examined under ad-libitum feeding (Fig. 2A, B, Fig. S2B). Shortened processes of MBH astrocytes in HFD-fed mice were associated with an increased number of GFAP-positive cells (which predominantly reflected astrocytes) in the MBH (Fig. 2C). Altogether, hypothalamic astrocytes adjust the size of their high-order processes according to nutritional condition, and the development of HFD-induced obesity is associated with altered process plasticity of astrocytes in the mediobasal hypothalamic region.

Shortening of astrocytic processes by moderate-level IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation
We have recently postulated that nutritional surplus can acutely and chronically upregulate hypothalamic IKKβ/NF-κB pathway and mediate the physiological and pathological response, respectively. Here, we designed to study if IKKβ/NF-κB might take part in the control of hypothalamic astrocytic process changes. Supportively, we observed that increased IKKβ/NF-κB activation by expression of constitutively-active IKKβ (CAIKKβ) in cultured hypothalamic astrocytes greatly blunted their processes and even the primary-order branches revealed by GFAP immunostaining (Fig. S3). To focus on the in vivo conditions, we employed a cell-specific transgenic mouse model in which CAIKKβ was expressed in the astrocytes to activate NF-κB in these cells. To generate these mice, we crossed Rosa 26-lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ (flag-tagged) mice with GFAP-Cre mice having Cre expression controlled by GFAP promoter – which is known to predominantly (although not exclusively) target astrocytes. The offspring compound mice were termed GFAP/CAIKKβ and compared to littermate Rosa 26-lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ mice which represented genotype-matched wildtype (WT) controls. Immunostaining confirmed that flag-tagged CAIKKβ was expressed in GFAP-positive cells (Fig. 2D). As noted, while homozygous GFAP/CAIKKβ+/+ mice suffered from brain damage and sickness due to severe neuroinflammation, heterozygous GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice were indistinguishable from the littermate control mice. Using NF-κB subunit RelA phosphorylation to report NF-κB activation, we confirmed that NF-κB was slightly or moderately upregulated in GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− astrocytes but strongly upregulated in GFAP/CAIKKβ+/+ astrocytes, compared to control astrocytes (Fig. 2E). The number of GFAP-positive cells (which mainly reflect astrocytes) in the MBH of these mice of young ages did not change until the mice were older (Fig. 2F). However, young GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice already displayed shortening of high-order processes of MBH astrocytes compared to the control group (Fig. 2G–J). Such altered astrocytic processes in GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice were already observable when they were young. Hence, moderate-level upregulation in IKKβ/NF-κB causes shortening of hypothalamic astrocytic high-order processes prior to a longer-term effect in increasing the number of astrocytes in this hypothalamic region.

Early-onset physiological effects of moderate-level astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation
Since astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB can acutely affect astrocytic process plasticity, but obesity represents a chronic status, we decided to examine if it might affect obesity-associated metabolic parameters which are known to be acutely regulated. These included glucose tolerance, insulin secretion, energy expenditure and blood pressure, as each of these functions can be acutely altered in normal physiology, and chronic impairments in these functions include glucose intolerance, insulin resistance and high blood pressure which collectively reflect the so-called “metabolic syndrome”. While homozygous GFAP/CAIKKβ+/+ mice were not suitable as many of them were developmentally unhealthy due to severe neuroinflammation, we employed heterozygous GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice which appeared normal in general. Indeed, young GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice and genotype-matched WT controls were comparable in terms of body weight, fat and lean mass and food intake (Fig. S4A–D). In contrast, these young GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice already demonstrated several early-onset metabolic changes, including glucose intolerance (Fig. 3A) and increased plasma insulin level (Fig. 3B). The basal metabolic rate of GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice, indicated by oxygen consumption, tended to be higher than that of control mice, but the difference did not reach a statistical significance (Fig. S4E). In a separate experiment, we profiled blood pressure of these mice using telemetric approach, results showing that blood pressure was higher in GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice than WT control mice during the resting-stage daytime (Fig. 3C–F). Thus, in association with hypothalamic astrocytic process shortening, moderate-level astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation led to early-onset physiological changes including glucose intolerance and blood pressure increase.

Early-onset physiological effects of hypothalamic astrocytic NF-κB inhibition
To further develop this study, we asked if HFD-induced astrocytic process shortening could be acutely reversed by astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB inhibition, and if so, whether this cellular effect might precede its physiological effect in reducing obesity. To answer this question, we designed an experiment in which astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB was acutely inhibited in C57BL/6 mice that already developed obesity through HFD feeding. Acute inhibition of hypothalamic astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB in these mice was achieved by intra-hypothalamic (largely the VMH subregion) injection of lentivirus expressing dominant-negative IκBα (DNIκBα) controlled by GFAP promoter (Fig. S5A). As shown in Fig. S5B–D, lentiviral DNIκBα led to a rapid reversal of HFD-induced astrocytic process shortening, but HFD-induced astrogliosis (indicated by increases in the cell number of astrocytes) did not rapidly reverse. Then, we analyzed the mice with HFD-induced obesity but hypothalamic astrocytic NF-κB was acutely inhibited through lentiviral DNIκBα injection. At an early time when the extent of obesity did not drop (Fig. S5E–H), lentiviral DNIκBα-injected mice demonstrated an improvement in glucose tolerance (Fig. 3G) as well as insulin sensitivity (Fig. 3H). Besides, obesity-related hypertension was found to be reversed during both daytime and nighttime (Fig. 3I–L). Thus, based on the gain- and loss-of-functional models, astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB can acutely regulate astrocytic process plasticity and physiological control of glucose metabolism and blood pressure.

Late-onset effect on body weight by moderate astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation
In our previous studies, we have established the role of IKKβ/NF-κB-dependent molecular inflammation in the development of HFD-induced weight gain and obesity (Li et al., 2012; Yan et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2015). Here, we continued to employ GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice to test if astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB could be involved in obesity development. According to Western blot results, increased NF-κB activity in the hypothalamus of chow-fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice was comparable with the increase induced by chronic HFD feeding in standard C57BL/6 mice (Fig. 4A), but we should mention that the affected cell types probably differed between these two experimental conditions. To dissociate the long-term effect of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB from that of chronic HFD feeding, GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice and their controls were maintained on a normal chow. Over a longitudinal follow-up, we noted that GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice tended to eat more than did WT controls, but this effect was hardly statistically significant until animals were half a year old (Fig. 4B). Similarly, GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice weighed similarly as did WT controls when they were young but were found heavier than control mice at older ages (Fig. 4C). To check if body weight increase in these GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice could be suggestive of pro-obesity development, we examined the lean and fat composition of these mice, showing that GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice had similar lean mass but doubled fat mass compared to controls (Fig. 4D, E). Thus, in addition to the early-onset effects on glucose and blood pressure, astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB activation exerts a late-onset effect on body weight and fat mass.

Counteraction against dietary obesity through astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB inhibition
Subsequently we studied if an inhibition of IKKβ/NF-κB in the astrocytes could reduce the effects of chronic overnutrition on body weight and fat mass. To do so, we developed a loss-of-function genetic mouse model with suppression of IKKβ in the astrocytes. To achieve this, we crossed IKKβlox/lox mice with GFAP-Cre mice, both lines were bred on a C57BL/6 background, leading to offspring GFAP/IKKβlox/lox and the littermate IKKβlox/lox controls. Because GFAP-Cre did not lead to a complete gene knockout, GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice maintained the basal NF-κB activity which appeared to be important for normal biology, since these mice were completely normal in terms of development and general physiology. On the other hand, the partial ablation of IKKβ substantially prevented NF-κB activation in response to pathological challenges, for example, TNFα failed to elevate NF-κB subunit RelA phosphorylation in cultured astrocytes which were isolated from GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice (Fig. 4F). Under chow feeding, food intake of GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice was noticeably lower than the control mice, but their body weight levels did not remarkably differ. Starting at 12 weeks of age, we placed a group of GFAP/IKKβlox/lox and littermate genotype-matched WT controls on HFD feeding. Compared to WT controls, GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice almost immediately showed a reduction in HFD intake which maintained throughout the follow-up (Fig 4G). Body weight profiling revealed that GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice significantly resisted the development of HFD-induced body weight and fat gain (Fig 4H–J). In addition, we generated a mouse model through injecting GFAP promoter-driven Cre lentiviruses into the MBH of IKKβlox/lox mice; these mice also demonstrated a protection against chronic HFD feeding-induced body weight excess as a result of a counteractive effect against chronic HFD feeding-associated overeating (Fig. S6). Altogether, IKKβ/NF-κB in the hypothalamus is critically involved in the astrocytic mechanism of obesity development.

Astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB in extracellular GABA-induced neuronal activation
Since nutritional status as well as inflammatory condition affect both the morphology of astrocytes and energy balance, we conceived that a change in the length of astrocytic process could affect hypothalamic neuronal activity and therefore mediate energy balance regulation. Since astrocytes are crucial for the homeostasis of neurotransmitters, we paid attention to a few and quickly noted that GABA was importantly relevant. In research, GABAergic neurons have been reported to regulate feeding, body weight and metabolic functions (Kim et al., 2012; Tong et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2015); however, it is still unclear if synaptic or non-synaptic extracellular GABA is mostly responsible. Using c-Fos as a neuronal activation marker, we found that compared to chow-fed WT control mice, many cells in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) as well as the VMH of chow-fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice were more sensitive to GABA agonist Baclofen-induced neuronal activation (Fig. 5A, B). Astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB loss-of-function model was also studied, using HFD-fed mice which received MBH injection of DNIκBα vs. control lentivirus as described in Fig. 3G–L. At an early time point when HFD-induced obesity was still comparable between two groups, these HFD-fed mice received an administration of Baclofen through an intra-hypothalamic injection. Compared to chow-fed WT control mice in Figure 5A–B, much more cells became c-Fos positive in the VMH and PVN of HFD-fed control mice following Baclofen injection (Fig. 5C). This increase largely represented an effect of chronic HFD feeding (data not shown), although the underlying basis still remains unclear. On the other hand, despite HFD feeding, Baclofen-induced neuronal activation was markedly prevented in DNIκBα-injected mice (Fig. 5C). Thus, a moderate level of IKKβ/NF-κB activation can turn up the hypothalamic response to GABA through astrocytes.

Control of hypothalamic extracellular GABA level by astrocytes and IKKβ/NF-κB
An important function of astrocytes in regulating GABA neural circuit is to clear GABA from synaptic cleft and the extracellular space through GABA transporters that are located on processes (Belanger et al., 2011; Minelli et al., 1996). Therefore, we measured extracellular GABA content in the MBH of mice under different feeding conditions via microdialysis. According to previous research, GABA transporter-3 (GAT3) is abundant in astrocytes and specifically localized in astrocytic process (Minelli et al., 1996). We found that GAT3 protein levels were higher in the hypothalamus than many other brain regions such as the cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum (Fig. S7A), indicating that this transporter may play a role in regulating GABA homeostasis in the hypothalamus. Since astrocytic process length was found sensitive to IKKβ/NF-κB manipulation, several experiments were performed using IKKβ/NF-κB models. Primary astrocytes from the hypothalamus were infected with lentiviruses expressing CAIKKβ (Fig. S7B). The results showed that CAIKKβ expression was sufficient to impair GABA uptake of astrocytes from culture medium. Next, we measured GABA concentrations in the MBH of various mouse models with chronic HFD feeding or IKKβ/NF-κB manipulations. The results showed that chronic HFD feeding led to an increase in extracellular GABA content within the MBH of C57BL/6 mice (Fig. 6A). Similarly, MBH extracellular GABA levels were significantly higher in GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice than in controls (Fig. 6B). GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice were also studied, showing that IKKβ knockout prevented HFD feeding from increasing MBH extracellular GABA content (Fig. 6C). These results suggest that astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB activity has an influence on extracellular GABA-induced neuronal activation, and this effect could be partially related to astrocytic regulation of extracellular GABA which therefore changes the sensitivity of GABA-dependent neuronal excitation.

Astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB-controlled extracellular GABA affects feeding and body weight
Presumably, changes in astrocytic process plasticity can affect the uptake of various neurotransmitters, for example, glutamate, if neurotransmitter uptake system is significantly present in the processes of astrocytes. In this study, we have shown that astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB manipulation led to early-term effects on glucose and blood pressure vs. late-term effects on feeding and body weight, which might involve different neurotransmitters. Given that hypothalamic GABAergic neurons are known to strikingly affect feeding and body weight (Kim et al., 2012; Tong et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2015), we wondered if extracellular GABA might be particularly important for feeding and body weight phenotypes in our IKKβ/NF-κB mouse models. To gain an insight into this possibility, we studied HFD-fed GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice which greatly benefited from feeding control and obesity prevention. These knockout mice and WT controls were maintained on HFD feeding, and during this feeding intervention, both mice were centrally treated for 4 weeks via intra-hypothalamic third ventricle injection with GABA receptor agonist Baclofen. Baclofen partially restored HFD intake GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice to the level of HFD intake experienced in vehicle-treated control mice (Fig. 6D). Consistently, the anti-obesity effect in GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice was significantly abolished by the treatment (Fig. 6E). Thus, while the neurotransmitter mechanism for early-onset and body weight-independent effects of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB remains to be studied, these results here support a role of GABA pathway in linking astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB in association with astrocytic process plasticity to feeding and body weight control.

GABA-controlled BDNF in feeding and body weight effect of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB
Through controlling extracellular GABA, astrocytes might modulate many GABA receptor-expressing neurons, such as POMC and AGRP neurons, since some of these neurons are reported to be responsive to GABA (Cowley et al., 2001; Smith et al., 2013). While future investigation on these neurons is needed, we directed a research effort in this work to BDNF-expressing neurons, because previous reports have pointed out that administration of GABA receptor antagonist can increase BDNF in several brain regions (Enna et al., 2006; Heese et al., 2000), and besides, BDNF is expressed in the VMH and PVN of hypothalamus and masterly regulates feeding behavior and energy homeostasis (An et al., 2015; Cordeira et al., 2014), while our results in Figure 5 revealed that astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB activation remarkably rendered many neurons in these two subregions to be more responsible to GABA. We questioned if BDNF neurons in these subregions might be partially responsible for feeding and body weight in the same line as the effect of GABA manipulation. In cultured hypothalamic neurons, we confirmed that increases in GABA concentration led to reduction in BDNF protein and mRNA levels (Fig. 6F, G). To test whether the decrease of BDNF expression by GABA is induced by GABAB receptor, cultured hypothalamic neurons were pretreated with GABAB receptor antagonist CGP54626 before GABA was added. Our results showed that this pre-treatment blunted the inhibition on BDNF expression by GABA (Fig. 6H). By measuring BDNF in hypothalamic tissues, we found that BDNF content in the MBH was lower in chow-fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice than chow-fed WT control mice (Fig. 6I) and was higher in HFD-fed GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice compared to HFD-fed WT control mice (Fig. 6J). To assess if BDNF could be physiologically involved in the anti-obesity effect of this astrocytic IKKβ knock model, we injected lentiviral BDNF shRNA to the MBH area of GFAP/IKKβlox/lox and control mice under HFD feeding. The results showed that the protective effects of IKKβ knockout on food intake and body weight were diminished by BDNF shRNA (Fig. 6K, L). Thus, while we predict that there are additional types of neurons which are accountable, BDNF neurons represent a link between extracellular GABA and the feeding/body weight changes induced by astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB.

Discussion
Astrocytic process plasticity in hypothalamic control of physiology
The central nervous system and in particular the hypothalamus are important for the regulation of metabolic physiology, and multiple neuronal circuits in the hypothalamus and other brain regions have been implicated in this regulation (Andrews et al., 2008; Chiappini et al., 2014; Coppari et al., 2005; Dodd et al., 2015; Flak et al., 2014; Kleinridders et al., 2013; Koch et al., 2015; Thaler et al., 2012; Zeltser et al., 2012). Over recent years astrocytes have increasingly been appreciated for the roles in brain’s functioning such as synaptic plasticity, neural excitation, and development (Chung et al., 2015; Eroglu and Barres, 2010; Jo et al., 2014; Otsu et al., 2015; Rangroo Thrane et al., 2013; Shigetomi et al., 2012). Very recently it was reported that the field size and morphology of hypothalamic astrocytes are influenced by leptin signaling (Kim et al., 2014) and that insulin receptor ablation can also affect the primary processes of astrocytes as well as brain glucose update and metabolism (Garcia-Caceres et al., 2016). Here our study revealed that the astrocytic processes in the mediobasal hypothalamic region undergo plastic changes according to nutritional states such as fasting vs. feeding. Of note, these changes occur at high-order processes rather than cell bodies or primary trunks low-order branches. Hence together with recent literature, we suggest that astrocytes can actively receive and react to metabolic information, resulting in dynamic changes of process length and density which adjust the hypothalamic condition and regulate the physiological response. Based on our results, this regulation by astrocytic processes involves feeding-associated functions such as blood glucose and blood pressure and perhaps appetite as well. Yet, the underlying mediators for changing astrocyte processes are still unclear, which, however, could be related to intracellular calcium since it determines cell morphology (Fawthrop and Evans, 1987; Molotkov et al., 2013; Otsu et al., 2015) and/or autophagy since it is more activated in the brain during fasting (Alirezaei et al., 2010). Despite these questions, IKKβ/NF-κB appears important, given that IKKβ/NF-κB activation or inhibition can both rapidly alter astrocytic process plasticity along with or prior to the accordant induction of physiological effects.

Metabolic regulation of astrocytes via extracellular neurotransmitter changes
Besides the prototypical role of hypothalamic neuropeptides in central control of metabolic physiology, lately synaptic neurotransmitters such as GABA have been related to metabolic regulation (Dietrich and Horvath, 2009; Ghamari-Langroudi et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2015a; Kim et al., 2012; Tong et al., 2008; Vong et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2015). However, as synaptic regulation occurs very fast, conceivably it should require additional modulations to process a slower-process regulation on metabolic physiology. The control of food intake via GABAergic synaptic transmission has been shown to occur within 20 milliseconds (Vong et al., 2011), but this feature differs from the physiological conditions in which feeding and metabolic responses to changing nutrient signals take much longer (up to hours), implicating that an extra-synaptic GABA action might exist. In this study, using microdialysis which mostly reflects non-synaptic GABA, we provided data showing that nutritional changes as well as astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB activation or inhibition consistently affect hypothalamic extracellular GABA levels. The levels of extracellular GABA were negatively correlated with the sizes of hypothalamic astrocytic processes consistently in all models that we studied. Given that astrocytic processes importantly regulate the update of extracellular GABA (Belanger et al., 2011; Minelli et al., 1996), a cause-effect relationship between them can be reasoned although not exactly proven in this study. Along this line, we identified a role of extracellular GABA-controlled BDNF in affecting food intake and body weight, providing an example of extracellular neurotransmitter-dependent neuropeptide in metabolic regulation. While this study focused on studying GABA-BDNF axis, we should point out that other neurotransmitters (such as glutamate) could also be involved, if astrocytic processes contain the update systems for these neurotransmitters. Indeed, early-onset vs. late-onset effects of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB in different physiology also suggest involvements of different neurotransmitters which influence different downstream neuropeptides.

Disease relevance of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB and process plasticity impairment
Under chronic overnutrition, hypothalamic dysfunctions are important for the development of dietary obesity and associated metabolic syndrome (such as glucose intolerance, insulin resistance and hypertension). The responsible mechanisms have multiple levels, one of which was recently related to a sustained, moderate level of IKKβ/NF-κB activation leading to hypothalamic molecular inflammatory changes (Li et al., 2012; Purkayastha et al., 2011; Yan et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2008). This set of hypothalamic molecular changes, appreciably termed “hypothalamic inflammation” although still vaguely defined, can substantially influence the normal functions of hypothalamic cells including neurons. In recent literature, it has been reported that overnutrition-induced hypothalamic inflammation is associated with astrogliosis (Thaler et al., 2012); however, it remains unknown if astrocytes are causally important for the development of obesity and related metabolic syndrome. In this study, we found that astrocyic process plasticity is impaired similarly by chronic overnutrition and by moderate-level IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation. Using genetic models, we revealed that IKKβ/NF-κB activation led to astrocytic process reduction while IKKβ/NF-κB inhibition rapidly reversed this process defect in mice with obesity, and these effects on astrocytic processes occurred before changes in cell numbers in both experimental conditions. Thus, we dissected out an event of process plasticity change which is independent of cell number. Altogether, as elucidated in Figure 7, a conceptual diagram is postulated, that is, when physiology is under changes from fed status to fasting, hypothalamic astrocytic processes are dynamically reduced, extracellular neurotransmitters such as GABA levels become elevated, which employ neuropeptides (such as GABA-controlled BDNF) to physiologically mediate different metabolic responses; on the other hand, some of these regulatory mechanisms and actions are enhanced under the condition of chronic overnutrition, critically through sustained IKKβ/NF-κB upregulation, which contribute to the loss of physiological homeostasis and eventually disease.

STAR METHODS
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the corresponding author Dongsheng Cai (dongsheng.cai@einstein.yu.edu).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animal study
Standard C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory. Rosa 26-lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ mice and GFAP-Cre mice obtained from Jackson Laboratory were then maintained on C57BL/6 strain background. IKKβlox/lox mice were also maintained on C57BL/6 strain background (Zhang et al., 2008). Mice were housed in standard, pathogen-free animal facility, 3–5 mice per cage, 12h/12h light and darkness cycles and maintained on a standard normal chow since weaning. As male mice in C57BL/6 background are prone to the development of obesity and associated disorders and it is standard procedure to use males to study these diseases, we used male mice in all studies. For obesity-related studies, mice were fed a HFD (60% kcal fat, Research Diets, Inc.) for indicated durations. Body weights were regularly measured and food intake was determined periodically through individual housing mice. Energy expenditure was determined using metabolic chambers (Columbus Instrument, Inc.), lean and fat mass of mice were measured via MRI, both performed through the physiology core at Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Glucose tolerance test (GTT) was performed in mice through intraperitoneal injection of glucose at 2g/kg body weight. Blood glucose levels during GTT were measured with LifeScan® blood glucose monitoring system. Blood insulin was measured using ELISA Kit (ALPCO). All procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

Cell cultures
Hypothalamus tissues were dissected from C57BL/6 mice on postnatal Day 4 for the isolation of astrocytes, the meninges were removed, and cells were dissociated in 0.05% trypsin-EDTA. Mixed cells were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Non-adherent cells were removed by changing the media every 3 days. After 7–10 days, cells were shaken rigorously in an orbital incubator at 0.23 g at 37 °C for 2 hours to detach microglia, then shaken again at 0.23 g at 37 °C overnight to remove oligodendrocytes. Remaining cells were astrocytes and were trypsinized and reseeded for further culture. Hypothalamus neurons were collected mouse embryos on embryonic Day 19. Hypothalamus was dissected using a stereo microscope, and then placed in 0.05% trypsin-EDTA for 30 min at 37°C. After trituration in Neurobasal media, cells were passed through a 70-μm cell strainer to remove tissue debris followed with a 40-μm cell strainer. After centrifuging, cells were resuspended in Neurobasal media containing 2% B27 and 2 mM glutamine and plated in 6-well plates pre-coated with 25 μg/ml poly-D-lysine for further culture. GABA contents in culture medium were detected via ELISA kits (Biotang). For immunostaining, astrocytes on coverslips were fixed with 4% PFA, blocked with the serum, and treated with mouse anti-GFAP (MAB3402, Millipore) primary antibody followed by reaction with Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibody (Invitrogen). Images were taken using a confocal microscope.

METHOD DETAILS
Cannulation and brain injection
As previously described (Kim et al., 2015b), using an ultra-precise (10 μm resolution) small animal stereotactic apparatus (David Kopf Instruments), a 26 gauge guide cannula (Plastics One, Inc.) was implanted into third ventricle of anesthetized mice at the midline coordinates of 1.7 mm posterior to bregma and 5.0 mm below the surface of skull. Intra-third ventricular injection was carried out with a 33-gauge internal cannula (Plastics One) connected to a 5-μl Hamilton Syringe. All drugs were dissolved in 0.5-μl artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) for injection. Injection of aCSF was used as vehicle control. For the bilateral lentivirus injection, an ultra-precise stereotactic apparatus were located to the hypothalamic area centering at the VMH at coordinates of 1.7 mm posterior to bregma, 5.6–5.8 mm below the surface of skull, and 0.25 mm lateral to midline. Purified lentiviruses suspended in 0.2 μl aCSF was injected over ~10-min period via a 26-gauge guide cannula and a 33-gauge internal injector (Plastics One) connected to a 5-μl Hamilton Syringe and infusion pump (WPI Instruments). Lentiviruses injection accuracy for each individual mouse was assessed post experiment through immunostaining of GFP which was contained in the lentiviral vector, and mice at least with 80% of GFP expression within the target region were considered qualified while mice which did not meet this criterion (&lt;20% failure rate) were excluded from the experiment.

Microdialysis and ELISA
A guide cannula for microdialysis (CMA) was implanted into the MBH area of anesthetized mice at coordinates of 1.7 mm posterior to bregma, 5.8 mm below the surface of skull, and 0.25 mm lateral to midline. As described in the literature (Gobrogge et al., 2009), after one-week recovery, a dialysis probe (CMA) with 1.0-mm membrane was inserted through the guide cannula and perfused continuously at 0.5 μl/min with aCSF using a glass Hamilton syringe connected to an infusion pump (WPI Instruments). Samples were collected through a tube connected to the probe. During sampling, mice were conscious with free movement. GABA contents in microdialysis samples were analyzed in Stable Isotope and Metabolomics Core Facility of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine. In brief, microdialysis samples were added with methanol, vortexed, and after centrifugation, supernatant was transferred and dried under gentle air flow. Linearity curve samples using a series of GABA quantity were prepared in the same procedure. Samples were analyzed by gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GC-TOFMS premier, Waters, USA). Metabolites separation was performed on a 30m DB-5MS column coupled with 10m guard column (Agilent, USA). Standard curve samples were run twice (before and after the microdialysis samples). The data was collected under a positive chemical ionization (PCI) mode. The mass range was set to 100 to 1200, and the lock mass was set to 286.0027. Data was processed with Masslynx software (Waters, MA, USA). To measure tissue BDNF content, hypothalamic tissue was homogenized in the lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerolphosphate, protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo), the homogenates were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 30 min, and the supernatant was used for BDNF assay via ELISA kit (Biotang).

Golgi staining
Golgi staining was performed as previously described (Giusti et al., 2014; Reichel et al., 2016), and to shift the staining towards glia cells instead of neurons, we adapted a modified protocol described by Ranjan and Mallick (Ranjan and Mallick, 2012). Mice were sacrificed under anesthesia, the brains carefully dissected out and briefly rinsed in dH2O, and the brains were incubated in 4% PFA-PBS at room temperature for 72 h. Subsequently the protocol of the FD Rapid GolgiStain™ Kit (FD Neurotechnologies, INC) was followed. A sufficient number of astrocytes across the ARC and VMH of each mouse was randomly traced using 100× objective and the Neurolucida 5 software (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT), and an adequate number of cells per condition were independently traced and analyzed quantitatively. Scholl analyses and dendritic length were performed using the Neurolucida Explorer (MBF Bioscience) software. Concentric Scholl circles around the center points of cell bodies were determined at various intervals. Cell types were identified according to literature-derived criteria (Bradl and Lassmann, 2010; Kimelberg and Nedergaard, 2010; Ranjan and Mallick, 2012) and our own observations (as exemplified in Fig. S1). In brief, astrocytes under Golgi staining were recognized by distinct characteristics including a star-like cellular shape, the domain area of which typically ranged from 25 to 65 μm in diameter, with a dense cell body staining (almost fused with the initial portions of cell processes) and highly-ramified thick processes which differ from processes of other glial cells. Microglia under Golgi staining characteristically presented a small cell body (usually &lt;5 μm in diameter) with less densely-stained, low-degree ramified and thin processes, the domain of which ranged from 10 to 20 μm in diameter. Oligodendrocytes under Golgi staining were identified by the presence of a round-oval distinctive cell body with the presence of highly densely-stained but few thick un-ramified short processes (often 1~3 densely stained processes) typically with a domain of 25–40 μm in diameter.

Immunohistology
Brain histology was analyzed using brain sections and immunostaining. Mice under anesthesia were transcardially perfused with 4% PFA and brains were removed, post-fixed in 4% PFA for 24 hours, and infiltrated with 20–30% sucrose. Brain sections (20 μm-thick) were cut using cryostat, blocked with serum of appropriate species, treated with primary antibodies: mouse antic-Fos (sc-166940, Santa Cruz), mouse anti-GFP (A-11120, Thermo Fisher), mouse anti-FLAG (F1804, Sigma) and chicken anti-GFAP (ab4674, Abcam), subsequently reacted with Alexa Fluor 488 or 555 secondary antibodies (Invitrogen). Naïve IgGs of appropriate species were used as negative controls. DAPI staining was used to reveal all cells in the section. Images were taken using a confocal microscope.

Telemetric probe implantation and recording
Radiotelemetric catheters (model TA11PA–C10, Data Sciences International, DSI) were implanted in the carotid artery, using the procedure we described previously (Purkayastha et al., 2011). Briefly, after mice were anesthetized, a ventral midline skin incision was made and the left common carotid artery was isolated under a surgical microscope. The proximal end of the artery was ligated below the carotid bifurcation, and the distal end was occluded with a microclip. A small incision was made near the proximal end, and pressure transmission catheter was guided into the artery, advanced to the aorta, and secured in place with sutures. The transmitter device was placed subcutaneously on the right flank, as close to the hind limb as possible. Subsequently, neck incision was closed using 5–0 sutures (Ethicon), and mice were allowed for 1~2 weeks of post-surgical recovery, and the pressure signals of each animal under conscious, free-moving conditions were recorded using the computerized method (DSI). BP data were sampled continuously with a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz with 1-minute segment duration.

Recombinant lentiviruses
The GFAP promoter was a gift kindly provided by Dr. Michael Brenner. Lentiviral vector of GFAP promoter-driven DNIκBα was generated by subcloning GFAP promoter into DNIκBα expressed lentiviral vector. Mouse BDNF shRNA and control scramble shRNA were constructed using pSico (Addgene). BDNF shRNA sequence: 5′-GAATTGGCTGGCGATTCAT-3′. Lentiviruses were produced by co-transfecting the viral expression vector with the packaging plasmids into HEK293T cells. At 24–36 hours after transfection, culture media were collected and filtered through a 0.45-μm filter to remove cell debris and followed by ultracentrifugation. After centrifugation, supernatant was removed, and lentiviruses in the pellet were re-suspended, and lentivirus titer was determined via ELISA kit (Clontech Laboratories).

mRNA analysis and western blot
Total RNA was extracted from tissues or cultured cells using TRIzol® (Invitrogen), and cDNA was synthesized using M-MLV RT System (Promega) followed by PCR amplification and quantification using SYBR® Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). House-keeping β-actin mRNA was used for PCR normalization. Animal tissues were homogenized, and proteins were dissolved in a lysis buffer. Proteins dissolved in lysis buffer were separated by SDS-PAGE and identified by immunoblotting. Primary antibodies included rabbit anti-p-RelA (3033, Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-RelA (8242, Cell Signaling), rabbit anti-β-actin (4970, Cell Signaling), mouse anti-flag (F1804, Sigma), rabbit anti-BDNF (ab72439, Abcam) and rabbit anti-GAT3 (ab431, Abcam). Secondary antibodies included HRP-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit antibodies (Pierce).

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Two-tailed Student’s t test was used for comparisons between two groups, and ANOVA and appropriate (Tukey) post-hoc analyses were used for comparisons among more than two groups. Data presented met normal distribution, data variance among comparable experimental groups was similar, and statistical tests for each figure were justified appropriate. Adequate sample sizes were chosen based on our previous research; animal number was 7–10 mice per group for metabolic physiological analysis and 4–6 independent samples per group for molecular analysis. The variances of each pair of data sets being compared were similar to each other and consistent with their being normally distributed. Mice were randomized into different groups with approximately equal numbers of animals in each group. None of qualified samples or data points were excluded from the statistical analysis. Experimental performers were not usually blind to animal treatments but outcomes were subjected to blind analysis whenever possible. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 7. Data were presented as mean ± s.e.m. P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Supplementary Material
1  Supplemental file  The authors sincerely thank Cai’s laboratory members for technical assistance. This study was supported by NIH R01 DK078750, R01 AG031774, R01 HL113180, and R01 DK 099136 (all to D. Cai).

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


          COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
        

The authors state that they have no competing financial interests.

Author contributions: DC conceived and designed the study and organized experimentation. YZ co-designed and performed majority of experiments, JR initiated and co-developed Golgi staining experiments, CH performed animal surgeries and involved physiological recordings. JZ did imaging of Golgi staining. All authors did data analysis and interpretation. YZ prepared all figures, YZ and JR assisted writing, and DC wrote the paper.

Figure 1 Hypothalamic and brain astrocytic processes in different nutritional conditions
Brain sections from standard C57BL/6 mice (3-month-old males) under ad-libitum chow feeding (Ad-lib) vs. 16-hour overnight fasting were processed for Golgi staining. Astrocytic processes in the ARC (A, B), VMH (C, D) and cortex (E, F) were quantified according to the process lengths of indicated branch orders (A, C, E) and the number of intersections across the indicated radius from the center point of cell body (B, D, F). A total number of 70–100 representative astrocytes from 5 mice per nutritional condition were randomly traced for all processes revealed by Golgi staining using computerized program and plotted according to subregions. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, *** p &lt; 0.001; n = 20–35 data sets per point, compared between ad-libitum feeding and fasting at underlined or indicated points. Error bars reflect mean ± s.e.m. See also Figure S1–S2.

Figure 2 Effects of HFD feeding or IKKβ/NF-κB on hypothalamic astrocytic processes
A–C Brains from ad-libitum fed mice following 3-month HFD vs. chow feeding were processed for (A, B) Golgi staining and process tracing as described in Figure 1 and (C) immunostaining for GFAP followed by counting of GFAP-positive cells in the MBH. D, E Immunostaining of hypothalamus sections (D) and Western blot of cultured astrocytes (E) obtained from the indicated mice. G/CAIKKβ+/−: GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice; G/CAIKKβ+/+: GFAP/CAIKKβ+/+ mice; WT: genotype-matched (lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ+/−) wildtype mice; 3V: third ventricle. Scale bar, 50 μm. F–J MBH sections from ad-libitum fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− and WT mice were used for GFAP immunostaining followed by counting of GFAP-positive cells (F) and Golgi staining followed by astrocytic process analyses (G–J). Experiments were based on 3- vs. 8-month-old (F) or 3-month-old (G–J) male mice, all maintained on a normal chow. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, *** p &lt; 0.001, n = 25–30 data sets from 5 mice per point (A, B, G–J) and n = 4 mice per group (C, F), compared between HFD and chow (A–C) and between G/CAIKKβ+/− and WT (F–J) at underlined or indicated points. Error bars reflect mean ± s.e.m. See also Figure S1–S3.

Figure 3 Early-onset physiological effects of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB manipulation
Chow-fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice vs. littermate genotype-matched (lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ+/−) WT mice (~4-month-old males) (A–F), and HFD-fed male C57BL/6 mice (5-month HFD feeding) following intra-MBH (mainly the VMH) injections of GFAP promoter-driven DNIκBα vs. control lentivirus (G–L), were profiled for glucose tolerance via GTT (A, G) and fasting plasma insulin level (B, H). Subgroups of these mice received aortic radio-telemetry implantation for blood pressure (BP) measurement (C–F, I–L). G/CAIKKβ+/−: GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice; GTT: glucose tolerance test; AUC: area under curve of GTT; SBP: systolic BP; DBP: diastolic BP. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, n = 9–10 mice per group (A, B, G, H) and n = 4 mice per group (C–F, I–L). Error bars reflect mean ± s.e.m. See also Figure S4–S5.

Figure 4 Late-onset effect of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB manipulation on body weight
A Hypothalamic samples from chow-fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− and littermate WT (lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ+/−) mice or from C57BL/6 mice following 5-month HFD vs. chow feeding were analyzed via Western blotting for p-RelA levels and presented following normalization with RelA levels. B–E Chow-fed GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice vs. littermate WT (lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ+/−) mice were longitudinally profiled for food intake (B) and body weight (C), and measured for lean mass (D) and fat mass (E) when mice were half a year old. F Astrocytes from new-born GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice vs. littermate WT (IKKβlox/lox) controls were cultured and treated with TNFα (30 ng/ml) vs. vehicle for 30 min before cell lysates were analyzed via Western blotting with the indicated antibodies. Bar graph: intensity of p-RelA blots normalized by RelA blots. G–J GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice and littermate WT (IKKβlox/lox) controls were maintained on a HFD since 12 weeks of age and profiled for food intake (G) and body weight gain (H) at the indicated ages, and measured for fat mass (I) and lean mass (J) at the age of half a year. G/CAIKKβ+/−: GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice; G/IKKβl/l: GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice; Veh: vehicle. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, *** p &lt; 0.001, n = 7–8 mice per group (B–E, G–J) and n = 4 mice per group (A, F). Error bars reflect mean ± s.e.m. See also Figure S4 and S6.

Figure 5 Effect of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB manipulation on neuronal activation
GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice versus littermate WT (lox-STOP-lox-CAIKKβ+/− ) mice (3 months old, chow fed males) (A, B) and HFD-fed C57BL/6 mice with MBH injections of GFAP promoter driven DNIκBα or control lentiviruses described in Figures 3I–L (C) were injected in the MBH with baclofen (20 ng) versus vehicle, and brains were dissected at 2 hours post-injection for c-Fos immunostaining and counting analysis. Images show the PVN from WT versus GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice following the injection as indicated. Scale bar, 100 μm. Bar graphs present the average numbers of cells positive for c-Fos in median sections of the PVN and VMH of the indicated mice. *p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, n = 4 mice per group (B, C). Error bars reflect mean ± SEM.

Figure 6 Effects of astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB on extracellular GABA and BDNF
A–C Extracellular GABA contents in the MBH were measured through microdialysis for (A) C57BL/6 mice which received 3-month HFD vs. chow feeding, (B) GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice vs. littermate WT controls, and (C) GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice vs. littermate WT controls. D–E HFD-fed GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice and littermate WT (IKKβlox/lox) mice received intra-third ventricle administration of Baclofen (20 ng) twice per week for 4 weeks and subsequently measured for HFD intake (D) and body weight (E). F–H Cultured hypothalamus neurons were treated with GABA at indicated concentrations for 4 hours (F–H), together with pre-treatment of CGP54626 (10 μM) for 30 min prior to GABA (1 mM) treatment (H), and measured for BDNF protein (F) and mRNA (G, H) levels. I–J Hypothalamic samples collected from overnight-fasted GFAP/CAIKKβ+/− mice (I) and GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice (J) vs. their respective littermate WT controls (I, J) were lysed and measured for BDNF via ELISA. K–L HFD-fed GFAP/IKKβlox/lox mice vs. littermate WT (IKKβlox/lox) controls were injected in the MBH with BDNF shRNA or scramble shRNA lentiviruses and measured for HFD intake (K) and body weight (L) after 4-week lentiviral treatment. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, *** p &lt; 0.001, n = 15 mice per group and 3 mice pooled per sample (A–C), n = 6–8 mice per group (D, E, I–L); n = 6 samples per group (G, H). Error bars reflect mean ± s.e.m. See also Figure S7.

Figure 7 Concluding points and proposed conceptual model
Physiological changes from fed status to fasting lead to decreases in hypothalamic astrocytic process density; accordingly hypothalamic extracellular neurotransmitters (such as GABA) levels are adjusted to modulate downstream neuropeptides (such as BDNF) and promote physiological switch from fasting to feeding which is associated with increased glucose and BP. Chronic overnutrition or sustained astrocytic IKKβ/NF-κB activation can similarly maintain astrocytic process shortening and alterations in extracellular GABA and BDNF expression, thus contributing to the development of metabolic syndrome. Potential connections indicated with question markers can be suggested from this work but remain to be established.

Highlights
Astrocytic process plasticity is vital for the central control of metabolic balance

Astrocytes control extracellular neurotransmitter level to regulate metabolic balance

Astrocytic plasticity is impaired by chronic overnutrition or metabolic inflammation

Inflamed astrocytes lead to metabolic imbalance and thus metabolic syndrome


   
            Alirezaei M  
            Kemball CC  
            Flynn CT  
            Wood MR  
            Whitton JL  
            Kiosses WB  
           2010 Short-term fasting induces profound neuronal autophagy Autophagy 6 702 710 20534972 

            Alvarez MI  
            Rivas L  
            Lacruz C  
            Toledano A  
           2015 Astroglial cell subtypes in the cerebella of normal adults, elderly adults, and patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a histological and immunohistochemical comparison Glia 63 287 312 25220544 

            An JJ  
            Liao GY  
            Kinney CE  
            Sahibzada N  
            Xu B  
           2015 Discrete BDNF Neurons in the Paraventricular Hypothalamus Control Feeding and Energy Expenditure Cell Metab 22 175 188 26073495 

            Andrews ZB  
            Liu ZW  
            Walllingford N  
            Erion DM  
            Borok E  
            Friedman JM  
            Tschop MH  
            Shanabrough M  
            Cline G  
            Shulman GI  
             
           2008 UCP2 mediates ghrelin’s action on NPY/AgRP neurons by lowering free radicals Nature 454 846 851 18668043 

            Belanger M  
            Allaman I  
            Magistretti PJ  
           2011 Brain energy metabolism: focus on astrocyte-neuron metabolic cooperation Cell Metab 14 724 738 22152301 

            Bradl M  
            Lassmann H  
           2010 Oligodendrocytes: biology and pathology Acta neuropathologica 119 37 53 19847447 

            Chiappini F  
            Catalano KJ  
            Lee J  
            Peroni OD  
            Lynch J  
            Dhaneshwar AS  
            Wellenstein K  
            Sontheimer A  
            Neel BG  
            Kahn BB  
           2014 Ventromedial hypothalamus-specific Ptpn1 deletion exacerbates diet-induced obesity in female mice J Clin Invest 124 3781 3792 25083988 

            Choi HB  
            Gordon GR  
            Zhou N  
            Tai C  
            Rungta RL  
            Martinez J  
            Milner TA  
            Ryu JK  
            McLarnon JG  
            Tresguerres M  
             
           2012 Metabolic communication between astrocytes and neurons via bicarbonate-responsive soluble adenylyl cyclase Neuron 75 1094 1104 22998876 

            Chung WS  
            Allen NJ  
            Eroglu C  
           2015 Astrocytes Control Synapse Formation, Function, and Elimination Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 7 a020370 25663667 

            Chung WS  
            Clarke LE  
            Wang GX  
            Stafford BK  
            Sher A  
            Chakraborty C  
            Joung J  
            Foo LC  
            Thompson A  
            Chen C  
             
           2013 Astrocytes mediate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways Nature 504 394 400 24270812 

            Cohen P  
            Zhao C  
            Cai X  
            Montez JM  
            Rohani SC  
            Feinstein P  
            Mombaerts P  
            Friedman JM  
           2001 Selective deletion of leptin receptor in neurons leads to obesity J Clin Invest 108 1113 1121 11602618 

            Cone RD  
           2005 Anatomy and regulation of the central melanocortin system Nat Neurosci 8 571 578 15856065 

            Coppari R  
            Ichinose M  
            Lee CE  
            Pullen AE  
            Kenny CD  
            McGovern RA  
            Tang V  
            Liu SM  
            Ludwig T  
            Chua SC Jr  
             
           2005 The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus: a key site for mediating leptin’s effects on glucose homeostasis and locomotor activity Cell Metab 1 63 72 16054045 

            Cordeira JW  
            Felsted JA  
            Teillon S  
            Daftary S  
            Panessiti M  
            Wirth J  
            Sena-Esteves M  
            Rios M  
           2014 Hypothalamic dysfunction of the thrombospondin receptor alpha2delta-1 underlies the overeating and obesity triggered by brain-derived neurotrophic factor deficiency J Neurosci 34 554 565 24403154 

            Cowley MA  
            Smart JL  
            Rubinstein M  
            Cerdan MG  
            Diano S  
            Horvath TL  
            Cone RD  
            Low MJ  
           2001 Leptin activates anorexigenic POMC neurons through a neural network in the arcuate nucleus Nature 411 480 484 11373681 

            Dietrich MO  
            Horvath TL  
           2009 GABA Keeps Up an Appetite for Life Cell 137 1177 1179 19563747 

            Dietrich MO  
            Horvath TL  
           2011 Synaptic plasticity of feeding circuits: hormones and hysteresis Cell 146 863 865 21925311 

            Dodd GT  
            Decherf S  
            Loh K  
            Simonds SE  
            Wiede F  
            Balland E  
            Merry TL  
            Munzberg H  
            Zhang ZY  
            Kahn BB  
             
           2015 Leptin and insulin act on POMC neurons to promote the browning of white fat Cell 160 88 104 25594176 

            Enna SJ  
            Reisman SA  
            Stanford JA  
           2006 CGP 56999A, a GABA(B) receptor antagonist, enhances expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and attenuates dopamine depletion in the rat corpus striatum following a 6-hydroxydopamine lesion of the nigrostriatal pathway Neurosci Lett 406 102 106 16890350 

            Eroglu C  
            Barres BA  
           2010 Regulation of synaptic connectivity by glia Nature 468 223 231 21068831 

            Fawthrop DJ  
            Evans RJ  
           1987 Morphological changes in cultured astrocytes following exposure to calcium ionophores Neurosci Lett 81 250 256 3124023 

            Fields RD  
            Stevens-Graham B  
           2002 New insights into neuron-glia communication Science 298 556 562 12386325 

            Flak JN  
            Patterson CM  
            Garfield AS  
            D’Agostino G  
            Goforth PB  
            Sutton AK  
            Malec PA  
            Wong JM  
            Germani M  
            Jones JC  
             
           2014 Leptin-inhibited PBN neurons enhance responses to hypoglycemia in negative energy balance Nat Neurosci 17 1744 1750 25383904 

            Flier JS  
            Maratos-Flier E  
           1998 Obesity and the hypothalamus: novel peptides for new pathways Cell 92 437 440 9491885 

            Fuente-Martin E  
            Garcia-Caceres C  
            Granado M  
            de Ceballos ML  
            Sanchez-Garrido MA  
            Sarman B  
            Liu ZW  
            Dietrich MO  
            Tena-Sempere M  
            Argente-Arizon P  
             
           2012 Leptin regulates glutamate and glucose transporters in hypothalamic astrocytes J Clin Invest 122 3900 3913 23064363 

            Garcia-Caceres C  
            Quarta C  
            Varela L  
            Gao Y  
            Gruber T  
            Legutko B  
            Jastroch M  
            Johansson P  
            Ninkovic J  
            Yi CX  
             
           2016 Astrocytic Insulin Signaling Couples Brain Glucose Uptake with Nutrient Availability Cell 166 867 880 27518562 

            Garcia-Segura LM  
            Chowen JA  
            Parducz A  
            Naftolin F  
           1994 Gonadal hormones as promoters of structural synaptic plasticity: cellular mechanisms Progress in neurobiology 44 279 307 7886228 

            Ghamari-Langroudi M  
            Digby GJ  
            Sebag JA  
            Millhauser GL  
            Palomino R  
            Matthews R  
            Gillyard T  
            Panaro BL  
            Tough IR  
            Cox HM  
             
           2015 G-protein-independent coupling of MC4R to Kir7.1 in hypothalamic neurons Nature 520 94 98 25600267 

            Giusti SA  
            Vogl AM  
            Brockmann MM  
            Vercelli CA  
            Rein ML  
            Trumbach D  
            Wurst W  
            Cazalla D  
            Stein V  
            Deussing JM  
             
           2014 MicroRNA-9 controls dendritic development by targeting REST eLife 3 

            Gobrogge KL  
            Liu Y  
            Young LJ  
            Wang Z  
           2009 Anterior hypothalamic vasopressin regulates pair-bonding and drug-induced aggression in a monogamous rodent Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 19144 19149 19858480 

            Grosche A  
            Grosche J  
            Tackenberg M  
            Scheller D  
            Gerstner G  
            Gumprecht A  
            Pannicke T  
            Hirrlinger PG  
            Wilhelmsson U  
            Huttmann K  
             
           2013 Versatile and simple approach to determine astrocyte territories in mouse neocortex and hippocampus PLoS One 8 e69143 23935940 

            Hama K  
            Arii T  
            Katayama E  
            Marton M  
            Ellisman MH  
           2004 Tri-dimensional morphometric analysis of astrocytic processes with high voltage electron microscopy of thick Golgi preparations Journal of neurocytology 33 277 285 15475683 

            Haydon PG  
            Carmignoto G  
           2006 Astrocyte control of synaptic transmission and neurovascular coupling Physiol Rev 86 1009 1031 16816144 

            Heese K  
            Otten U  
            Mathivet P  
            Raiteri M  
            Marescaux C  
            Bernasconi R  
           2000 GABA(B) receptor antagonists elevate both mRNA and protein levels of the neurotrophins nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) but not neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) in brain and spinal cord of rats Neuropharmacology 39 449 462 10698011 

            Ishibashi T  
            Dakin KA  
            Stevens B  
            Lee PR  
            Kozlov SV  
            Stewart CL  
            Fields RD  
           2006 Astrocytes promote myelination in response to electrical impulses Neuron 49 823 832 16543131 

            Jo S  
            Yarishkin O  
            Hwang YJ  
            Chun YE  
            Park M  
            Woo DH  
            Bae JY  
            Kim T  
            Lee J  
            Chun H  
             
           2014 GABA from reactive astrocytes impairs memory in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease Nat Med 20 886 896 24973918 

            Kievit P  
            Howard JK  
            Badman MK  
            Balthasar N  
            Coppari R  
            Mori H  
            Lee CE  
            Elmquist JK  
            Yoshimura A  
            Flier JS  
           2006 Enhanced leptin sensitivity and improved glucose homeostasis in mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 in POMC-expressing cells Cell Metab 4 123 132 16890540 

            Kim ER  
            Wu Z  
            Sun H  
            Xu Y  
            Mangieri LR  
            Xu Y  
            Tong Q  
           2015a Hypothalamic Non-AgRP, Non-POMC GABAergic Neurons Are Required for Postweaning Feeding and NPY Hyperphagia J Neurosci 35 10440 10450 26203139 

            Kim JG  
            Suyama S  
            Koch M  
            Jin S  
            Argente-Arizon P  
            Argente J  
            Liu ZW  
            Zimmer MR  
            Jeong JK  
            Szigeti-Buck K  
             
           2014 Leptin signaling in astrocytes regulates hypothalamic neuronal circuits and feeding Nat Neurosci 17 908 910 24880214 

            Kim KW  
            Donato J Jr  
            Berglund ED  
            Choi YH  
            Kohno D  
            Elias CF  
            DePinho RA  
            Elmquist JK  
           2012 FOXO1 in the ventromedial hypothalamus regulates energy balance J Clin Invest 122 2578 2589 22653058 

            Kim MS  
            Yan J  
            Wu W  
            Zhang G  
            Zhang Y  
            Cai D  
           2015b Rapid linkage of innate immunological signals to adaptive immunity by the brain-fat axis Nat Immunol 16 525 533 25848866 

            Kimelberg HK  
            Nedergaard M  
           2010 Functions of astrocytes and their potential as therapeutic targets Neurotherapeutics : the journal of the American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics 7 338 353 20880499 

            Kitamura T  
            Feng Y  
            Kitamura YI  
            Chua SC Jr  
            Xu AW  
            Barsh GS  
            Rossetti L  
            Accili D  
           2006 Forkhead protein FoxO1 mediates Agrp-dependent effects of leptin on food intake Nat Med 12 534 540 16604086 

            Kleinridders A  
            Lauritzen HP  
            Ussar S  
            Christensen JH  
            Mori MA  
            Bross P  
            Kahn CR  
           2013 Leptin regulation of Hsp60 impacts hypothalamic insulin signaling J Clin Invest 123 4667 4680 24084737 

            Koch M  
            Varela L  
            Kim JG  
            Kim JD  
            Hernandez-Nuno F  
            Simonds SE  
            Castorena CM  
            Vianna CR  
            Elmquist JK  
            Morozov YM  
             
           2015 Hypothalamic POMC neurons promote cannabinoid-induced feeding Nature 519 45 50 25707796 

            Lam TK  
            Pocai A  
            Gutierrez-Juarez R  
            Obici S  
            Bryan J  
            Guilar-Bryan L  
            Schwartz GJ  
            Rossetti L  
           2005 Hypothalamic sensing of circulating fatty acids is required for glucose homeostasis Nat Med 11 320 327 15735652 

            Li J  
            Tang Y  
            Cai D  
           2012 IKKbeta/NF-kappaB disrupts adult hypothalamic neural stem cells to mediate a neurodegenerative mechanism of dietary obesity and pre-diabetes Nat Cell Biol 14 999 1012 22940906 

            Marin-Padilla M  
           1995 Prenatal development of fibrous (white matter), protoplasmic (gray matter), and layer I astrocytes in the human cerebral cortex: a Golgi study J Comp Neurol 357 554 572 7545703 

            Marty N  
            Dallaporta M  
            Foretz M  
            Emery M  
            Tarussio D  
            Bady I  
            Binnert C  
            Beermann F  
            Thorens B  
           2005 Regulation of glucagon secretion by glucose transporter type 2 (glut2) and astrocyte-dependent glucose sensors J Clin Invest 115 3545 3553 16322792 

            Minelli A  
            DeBiasi S  
            Brecha NC  
            Zuccarello LV  
            Conti F  
           1996 GAT-3, a high-affinity GABA plasma membrane transporter, is localized to astrocytic processes, and it is not confined to the vicinity of GABAergic synapses in the cerebral cortex J Neurosci 16 6255 6264 8815906 

            Molotkov D  
            Zobova S  
            Arcas JM  
            Khiroug L  
           2013 Calcium-induced outgrowth of astrocytic peripheral processes requires actin binding by Profilin-1 Cell calcium 53 338 348 23578580 

            Munzberg H  
            Myers MG Jr  
           2005 Molecular and anatomical determinants of central leptin resistance Nat Neurosci 8 566 570 15856064 

            Muroyama Y  
            Fujiwara Y  
            Orkin SH  
            Rowitch DH  
           2005 Specification of astrocytes by bHLH protein SCL in a restricted region of the neural tube Nature 438 360 363 16292311 

            Muthukumar AK  
            Stork T  
            Freeman MR  
           2014 Activity-dependent regulation of astrocyte GAT levels during synaptogenesis Nat Neurosci 17 1340 1350 25151265 

            Nedergaard M  
            Ransom B  
            Goldman SA  
           2003 New roles for astrocytes: redefining the functional architecture of the brain Trends Neurosci 26 523 530 14522144 

            Ogata K  
            Kosaka T  
           2002 Structural and quantitative analysis of astrocytes in the mouse hippocampus Neuroscience 113 221 233 12123700 

            Otsu Y  
            Couchman K  
            Lyons DG  
            Collot M  
            Agarwal A  
            Mallet JM  
            Pfrieger FW  
            Bergles DE  
            Charpak S  
           2015 Calcium dynamics in astrocyte processes during neurovascular coupling Nat Neurosci 18 210 218 25531572 

            Perea G  
            Yang A  
            Boyden ES  
            Sur M  
           2014 Optogenetic astrocyte activation modulates response selectivity of visual cortex neurons in vivo Nat Commun 5 3262 24500276 

            Purkayastha S  
            Zhang G  
            Cai D  
           2011 Uncoupling the mechanisms of obesity and hypertension by targeting hypothalamic IKK-beta and NF-kappaB Nat Med 17 883 887 21642978 

            Rangroo Thrane V  
            Thrane AS  
            Wang F  
            Cotrina ML  
            Smith NA  
            Chen M  
            Xu Q  
            Kang N  
            Fujita T  
            Nagelhus EA  
             
           2013 Ammonia triggers neuronal disinhibition and seizures by impairing astrocyte potassium buffering Nat Med 19 1643 1648 24240184 

            Ranjan A  
            Mallick BN  
           2012 Differential staining of glia and neurons by modified Golgi-Cox method Journal of Neuroscience Methods 209 269 279 22750653 

            Reichel JM  
            Bedenk BT  
            Gassen NC  
            Hafner K  
            Bura SA  
            Almeida-Correa S  
            Genewsky A  
            Dedic N  
            Giesert F  
            Agarwal A  
             
           2016 Beware of your Cre-ation: lacZ expression impairs neuronal integrity and hippocampus-dependent memory Hippocampus 

            Schachtrup C  
            Ryu JK  
            Mammadzada K  
            Khan AS  
            Carlton PM  
            Perez A  
            Christian F  
            Le Moan N  
            Vagena E  
            Baeza-Raja B  
             
           2015 Nuclear pore complex remodeling by p75(NTR) cleavage controls TGF-beta signaling and astrocyte functions Nat Neurosci 18 1077 1080 26120963 

            Schwartz MW  
            Woods SC  
            Porte D Jr  
            Seeley RJ  
            Baskin DG  
           2000 Central nervous system control of food intake Nature 404 661 671 10766253 

            Shigetomi E  
            Tong X  
            Kwan KY  
            Corey DP  
            Khakh BS  
           2012 TRPA1 channels regulate astrocyte resting calcium and inhibitory synapse efficacy through GAT-3 Nat Neurosci 15 70 80 

            Smith AW  
            Bosch MA  
            Wagner EJ  
            Ronnekleiv OK  
            Kelly MJ  
           2013 The membrane estrogen receptor ligand STX rapidly enhances GABAergic signaling in NPY/AgRP neurons: role in mediating the anorexigenic effects of 17beta-estradiol. American journal of physiology Endocrinology and metabolism 305 E632 640 23820624 

            Sullivan SM  
            Bjorkman ST  
            Miller SM  
            Colditz PB  
            Pow DV  
           2010 Morphological changes in white matter astrocytes in response to hypoxia/ischemia in the neonatal pig Brain research 1319 164 174 20079338 

            Sykova E  
           2004 Extrasynaptic volume transmission and diffusion parameters of the extracellular space Neuroscience 129 861 876 15561404 

            Thaler JP  
            Yi CX  
            Schur EA  
            Guyenet SJ  
            Hwang BH  
            Dietrich MO  
            Zhao X  
            Sarruf DA  
            Izgur V  
            Maravilla KR  
             
           2012 Obesity is associated with hypothalamic injury in rodents and humans J Clin Invest 122 153 162 22201683 

            Theodosis DT  
            Poulain DA  
            Oliet SH  
           2008 Activity-dependent structural and functional plasticity of astrocyte-neuron interactions Physiol Rev 88 983 1008 18626065 

            Tong Q  
            Ye CP  
            Jones JE  
            Elmquist JK  
            Lowell BB  
           2008 Synaptic release of GABA by AgRP neurons is required for normal regulation of energy balance Nat Neurosci 11 998 1000 19160495 

            Tschop MH  
            Castaneda TR  
            Woods SC  
           2006 The brain is getting ready for dinner Cell Metab 4 257 258 17011496 

            Vong L  
            Ye C  
            Yang Z  
            Choi B  
            Chua S Jr  
            Lowell BB  
           2011 Leptin action on GABAergic neurons prevents obesity and reduces inhibitory tone to POMC neurons Neuron 71 142 154 21745644 

            Witkin JW  
            Ferin M  
            Popilskis SJ  
            Silverman AJ  
           1991 Effects of gonadal steroids on the ultrastructure of GnRH neurons in the rhesus monkey: synaptic input and glial apposition Endocrinology 129 1083 1092 1855453 

            Wu Q  
            Boyle MP  
            Palmiter RD  
           2009 Loss of GABAergic signaling by AgRP neurons to the parabrachial nucleus leads to starvation Cell 137 1225 1234 19563755 

            Wu Z  
            Kim ER  
            Sun H  
            Xu Y  
            Mangieri LR  
            Li DP  
            Pan HL  
            Xu Y  
            Arenkiel BR  
            Tong Q  
           2015 GABAergic projections from lateral hypothalamus to paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus promote feeding J Neurosci 35 3312 3318 25716832 

            Wyss-Coray T  
            Loike JD  
            Brionne TC  
            Lu E  
            Anankov R  
            Yan F  
            Silverstein SC  
            Husemann J  
           2003 Adult mouse astrocytes degrade amyloid-beta in vitro and in situ Nat Med 9 453 457 12612547 

            Yan J  
            Zhang H  
            Yin Y  
            Li J  
            Tang Y  
            Purkayastha S  
            Li L  
            Cai D  
           2014 Obesity-and aging-induced excess of central transforming growth factor-beta potentiates diabetic development via an RNA stress response Nat Med 20 1001 1008 25086906 

            Zeltser LM  
            Seeley RJ  
            Tschop MH  
           2012 Synaptic plasticity in neuronal circuits regulating energy balance Nat Neurosci 15 1336 1342 23007188 

            Zhang X  
            Zhang G  
            Zhang H  
            Karin M  
            Bai H  
            Cai D  
           2008 Hypothalamic IKKbeta/NF-kappaB and ER stress link overnutrition to energy imbalance and obesity Cell 135 61 73 18854155 

            Zhang Y  
            Liu G  
            Yan J  
            Zhang Y  
            Li B  
            Cai D  
           2015 Metabolic learning and memory formation by the brain influence systemic metabolic homeostasis Nat Commun 6 6704 25848677 

