LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   77021184161Immunol RevImmunol. Rev.Immunological reviews0105-28961600-065X28658558549295910.1111/imr.12546NIHMS859929ArticleThe atopic march: current insights into skin barrier dysfunction and epithelial cell-derived cytokines Han Hongwei 1Roan Florence 1Ziegler Steven F. 121 Immunology Program, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98101, USA2 Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USACorresponding Author: Correspondence should be addressed to S.F.Z. (sziegler@benaroyaresearch.org), Steven F. Ziegler, Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, 1201 Ninth Avenue, Seattle WA 98101, Telephone: 206-287-5657, Fax: 206-342-657217 3 2017 7 2017 01 7 2018 278 1 116 130 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Summary
Atopic dermatitis often precedes the development of other atopic diseases. The atopic march describes this temporal relationship in the natural history of atopic diseases. Although the pathophysiological mechanisms that underlie this relationship are poorly understood, epidemiological and genetic data have suggested that the skin might be an important route of sensitization to allergens. Animal models have begun to elucidate how skin barrier defects can lead to systemic allergen sensitization. Emerging data now suggest that epithelial cell-derived cytokines such as thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), IL-33, and IL-25 may drive the progression from atopic dermatitis to asthma and food allergy. This review focuses on current concepts of the role of skin barrier defects and epithelial cell-derived cytokines in the initiation and maintenance of allergic inflammation and the atopic march.

atopicallergicTSLPIL-33epithelialinflammation
   1. Introduction
The concept of “atopy” (derived from the Greek atopia, meaning “placelessness”) was introduced by Coca and Cooke in 1923 to describe the phenomena of allergic hypersensitivity (1). Atopy is characterized by exaggerated immune responses to allergic stimuli and high IgE that can lead to clinical disease at a variety of anatomic sites. In general, clinical symptoms of atopy are not present at birth (2); however, atopic individuals are predisposed to the development of allergies. For example, the “allergic triad” – atopic dermatitis (eczema), allergic rhinitis, and allergic asthma – frequently presents in a single individual (3, 4). Other allergic diseases, such as food allergies, eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), and allergic conjunctivitis are also common in atopic patients (5–8).

While allergic symptoms at specific sites often wax and wane over time, the natural history of atopic diseases follows a characteristic sequence of events: the first manifestation of atopy is frequently atopic dermatitis, followed later by food allergy, allergic rhinitis, and allergic asthma. The term “atopic march” (or “allergic march”) describes this developmental progression of atopic diseases. The atopic march often begins early in infancy with the development of atopic dermatitis, which peaks in prevalence within the first two years of life (9). Of the children who develop atopic dermatitis, many, if not most, develop the disease within the first six months of life (9, 10). The age at which food allergies present varies depending upon the allergen; allergies to hen’s egg and cow’s milk generally develop within the first year of life, whereas allergies to wheat, soy and peanut tend to develop later in childhood (11). The prevalence of allergic rhinitis continues to rise from early childhood into adolescence (12). Although asthma has substantial heterogeneity that likely represents distinct pathophysiological mechanisms, individuals with chronic asthma often present before the age of five (13–15).

Children with atopic dermatitis are more likely to develop other atopic diseases than those without atopic dermatitis (16–19). Furthermore, the severity and chronicity of atopic dermatitis also correlate with increased incidence of atopic diseases (16, 17, 20). Whereas around 20% of children with mild atopic dermatitis develop asthma, over 60% with severe atopic dermatitis develop asthma (21, 22). A recent systematic review of studies that examined the relationship between atopic dermatitis and food allergies noted six-fold higher odds of food sensitization in children with atopic dermatitis than in healthy controls as well as positive correlations between food allergy and the age of onset, severity, and chronicity of atopic dermatitis (17).

Although the mechanisms that underlie the temporal relationship of diseases in the atopic march are still poorly understood, epidemiological studies have provided a framework for experimental models to examine how atopic dermatitis and skin barrier dysfunction can lead to disease at other anatomic sites. We present here a review of factors that affect the development of atopic diseases and the atopic march with a focus on the role of skin barrier dysfunction and epithelial cell-derived cytokines. We conclude with a discussion of approaches to prevent development of the atopic march and how epithelial cell-derived cytokines may represent a new therapeutic target for the prevention of the atopic march and treatment of atopic diseases.

2. Environmental factors in atopic disease development
Over the last century, there has been a rapid rise in atopic disease incidence, particularly in more industrialized countries (23–26). This increase in atopic diseases has led to the proposal of the “hygiene hypothesis,” which suggests that early infectious or microbial exposures may play a protective role against the development of atopic diseases. A wide variety of lifestyle and environmental changes are thought to have contributed to changes in childhood infectious and microbial exposures. In 1989, Strachan noted an inverse relationship between the subject’s number of siblings and the rate of allergic disease in those individuals. He proposed that fewer older siblings, improvements in household amenities, and higher standards of personal cleanliness resulted in decreased cross infection that subsequently led to increases in clinical manifestations of allergic disease (27). Other studies have also supported a correlation between family size and atopic disease prevalence, at least in more affluent populations (28–30). In less industrialized nations, the frequency of atopic diseases appears to be higher in more affluent communities than in less affluent ones and higher in urban areas than in rural areas (31–35). Some studies have suggested that exposure to helminths may be protective in these less affluent, more rural communities (31, 35, 36). The strongest epidemiological data for the hygiene hypothesis in atopic disease development may be the results from studies of children who have grown up on farms. Whereas some data support a positive correlation between nasal colonization with certain types of bacteria and risk for recurrent wheeze and asthma early in life (37), increasing numbers of studies now show that growing up on farms, which generally correlates with increased microbial exposure, is protective against the development of asthma (38–40) A recent study in the United States examined asthma and allergic sensitization in Amish communities that follow traditional farming practices and Hutterites that follow industrialized farming practices (39). Although these communities share a common genetic ancestry, the Amish had a lower prevalence of asthma and allergic sensitization than the Hutterites. Median levels of endotoxin were also significantly higher in the Amish community.

Our understanding of how infectious or microbial exposures affect atopic disease risk remains limited, but several studies suggest that these exposures may “tolerize” the immune system through effects on both the innate and adaptive immune system. In the study by Stein and colleagues, immune profiling and gene expression analyses suggested that modulation of the innate immune system was an important underlying mechanism that correlated with protection against allergic diseases in the Amish population (39). Maternal farm exposure during pregnancy can skew early immune development of the fetus toward an allergy-protective status that is potentially mediated by Th1 or regulatory T (Treg) cells (41). Childhood exposures to microbial products can also regulate epithelial response to allergens (40). Thus, this immune modulation may occur during pregnancy or as early life exposures.

3. The genetics of atopic diseases and the atopic march
While changes in environmental exposures provide some potential as targeted means of decreasing the prevalence of atopic disease, there is a strong influence of genetics on the development of allergies. Based primarily on twin studies of asthma and atopic dermatitis, the heritability of atopic diseases has been estimated to be around 60 to 75% (42–44).

3.1. Epithelial defects and the genetics of atopic diseases
Genetic studies have provided evidence of the importance of epithelial barrier defects in the pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis and other atopic diseases. In particular, mutations in genes encoding three important components of the epithelial barrier of the skin – filaggrin, serine peptidase inhibitor Kazal-type 5 (SPINK5), and corneodesmosin – are associated with atopic dermatitis or atopic dermatitis-like syndromes as well as atopic diseases at other sites.

Filaggrin is expressed as the precursor protein profilaggrin that is subsequently cleaved into filaggrin, which then aggregates and organizes keratin filaments within the skin epithelium. Mutations in the gene encoding filaggrin (FLG) can give rise to ichthyosis vulgaris and lead to an increased susceptibility to atopic dermatitis (45, 46). Filaggrin loss-of-function mutations have been shown to be associated with increased risk of food allergy and eosinophilic esophagitis (47, 48). Some studies have also reported increased risk of asthma or increased asthma severity with these filaggrin mutations, but it is unclear whether this effect on asthma incidence or severity was dependent on having coincident atopic dermatitis (49–51).

Netherton syndrome is a severe, autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the SPINK5 gene, which encodes serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 5 (also referred to as lympho-epithelial Kazal-type-related inhibitor [LEKTI]) (52, 53). At the neutral pH of the deep stratum corneum, LEKTI binds and inhibits the proteases kallikrein related peptidase 5 (KLK5) and KLK7; in the acidic conditions of the upper stratum corneum, LEKTI is inhibited, which allows KLK5 and KLK7 to function and promote skin peeling (54). In Netherton syndrome, LEKTI deficiency allows for KLK5 and KLK7 proteolytic activity even in the deeper levels of the skin. Infants and children with this syndrome develop a severe atopic dermatitis-like syndrome and a specific hair shaft defect (trichorrexis invaginata or ‘bamboo hair’) (55). Netherton syndrome patients also have other atopic manifestations including hay fever, food allergies, high serum IgE levels, and hypereosinophilia (52, 56, 57).

Another disorder that overlaps clinically with Netherton’s syndrome is an inflammatory subtype of generalized skin peeling syndrome (type B). Genetic studies have identified autosomal recessive mutations in the corneodesmosin gene (CDSN) as the cause of this syndrome (58–60). Mutations associated with generalized skin peeling syndrome type B typically result in a complete loss of corneodesmosin, a secreted glycoprotein component of corneodesmosomes that maintain cell-cell adhesion in the outer layers of the skin. Loss of corneodesmosin in this syndrome results in generalized skin peeling (exfoliation). Although skin peeling syndrome type B is quite rare, atopic manifestations, including food allergies and asthma, do seem to be major features of this syndrome (61).

Questions remain regarding the role of skin sensitization in driving the atopic march in these diseases, since there have been conflicting reports about filaggrin and LETKI expression in the esophagus. Whereas one report showed that immunohistochemical analysis of filaggrin expression in esophageal biopsies was negative (62), levels of filaggrin and LETKI were then reported to be present and lower in eosinophilic esophagitis samples than in normal esophageal tissue (63). Thus, whether alterations in filaggrin and LETKI within the esophagus lead to increased susceptibility to eosinophilic esophagitis or food allergy remains unknown. Corneodesmosin is not expressed in the esophagus or gastrointestinal tract, and none of these genes are expressed in the lung (64, 65). Animal models may help dissect the role of skin barrier dysfunction in atopic diseases at other sites.

3.2. The genetics of the atopic march
As discussed earlier, mutations in the filaggrin gene are strongly associated with risk for atopic dermatitis but have also been associated with risk for food allergies and asthma. Additional support for a central role of the epithelium in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases is provided by variants of genes encoding epithelial cell-derived cytokines and their receptors that confer increased risk of allergic disease. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) at the loci for thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) or its receptor have been implicated in risk for asthma, atopic dermatitis, and eosinophilic esophagitis (66–69); SNPs in the loci for IL-33 or its receptor are associated with risk for asthma and atopic dermatitis (70–72).

A large number of studies have now been performed examining the genetics of individual atopic diseases. In a large genome-wide association study (GWAS) of asthma conducted by the GABRIEL consortium, IL18R1, IL33, IL1RL1 (encoding the IL-33 receptor), SMAD3 (a transcriptional regulator activated by TGF-β signaling), ORMDL3, HLA-DQ and IL2RB loci were all significantly associated with asthma (72). In the GABRIEL consortium study, the ORMDL3/GSDMB locus was found to be specific to child-onset asthma. Genetic studies of food allergies have generally examined specific candidate genes; the locus encompassing HLA-DQ and HLA-DR was the only locus that reached genome wide significance in a GWAS for peanut allergy (73). Studies of atopic dermatitis have highlighted the involvement of genes in pathways regulating the skin epithelium and type 2 inflammation (74).

Two studies have examined whether genetic loci were associated with the atopic march phenotype. A GWAS of atopic dermatitis with or without asthma identified four loci (FLG, RAD/IL13 [5q31], MHC [6p21], and 11q13.5) that associated with atopic dermatitis but differed in their relative contributions toward co-morbid asthma (75). Marenholz and colleagues performed a meta-analysis to identify susceptibility genes specifically associated with development of atopic dermatitis followed by allergic airway disease (76). They identified five loci previously associated with atopic dermatitis or asthma (FLG [1q21.3], IL4/KIF3A [5q31.1], AP5B1/OVOL1 [11q13.1], C11orf30/LRRC32 [11q13.5] and IKZF3 [17q21]) and two loci not previously associated with atopic diseases (EFHC1 [6p12.3] and a locus between TMTC2 and SLC6A15 [12q21.3]).

Although some genetic susceptibility loci seem specific to certain atopic diseases, the numerous loci associated with both atopic dermatitis and asthma suggest shared underlying pathways. Of note, the genetics of atopic dermatitis has highlighted the importance of the skin barrier. The increased susceptibility to allergic diseases at multiple anatomic sites seen in individuals with fillaggrin, SPINK5, and CDSN mutations also suggests a pathophysiological or mechanistic link between skin barrier defects and increased risk of atopic disease at other sites.

4. Skin sensitization and the atopic march
How early can sensitization begin, and what is the role of the skin as a site of sensitization in the development of the atopic march? As a means of determining when sensitization takes place, most studies have used IgE as a serologic marker of sensitization. IgE antibodies of fetal origin can be generated as early as the 11th week of gestation (9, 16, 77). However, in a large, population-based birth cohort study, peanut-specific IgE was not detected in cord blood samples, even in samples from children who subsequently developed peanut sensitization or allergy (16). The first IgE responses to food proteins generally developed during the first months of life, peaked in prevalence at around 10% at 1 year of age, and then decreased to 3% by 6 years of age (9, 11, 16). Although high levels of hen’s egg-specific IgE can sometimes be detected in infants that are completely breast-fed, this is likely to be through the transfer of maternal IgE from the mother’s milk (78). Whether this transfer of maternal IgE may promote allergic disease development or tolerance remains unclear (79). Sensitization to inhalant allergens generally develop after infancy (11).

Although it is difficult to establish directly the frequency to which sensitization occurs through the skin, the observation that atopic dermatitis tends to precede atopic disease at other sites has led to the proposal that the skin may be an important site in the initiation of the atopic march. In fact, even in the absence of atopic dermatitis, children with skin barrier defects are still at a higher risk for asthma than healthy children, suggesting that the skin may serve as a site for sensitization to allergens even when allergic skin inflammation is absent (16).

In asthma, the distribution of allergens within the environment typically can result in both skin and lung exposures and thus may preclude the study of routes of sensitization. However, some occupational exposures that likely occur through the skin, such as exposure to isocyanates, can increase asthma risk (80). In chronic beryllium disease, an occupational lung disease, beryllium can penetrate the skin, and both skin and lung exposures have been suggested as routes of beryllium sensitization in the workplace (81–84). There is certainly considerable heterogeneity in asthma, and the underlying pathophysiology of childhood allergic asthma and occupational asthma are distinct. However, these occupational exposures provide at least some data to suggest that the skin may be a site of sensitization for subsequent development of asthma.

Several studies have been able to link skin allergen exposure to increased risk of food allergies to those allergens. A case-control study in Japan showed that use of a wheat-containing facial soap was positively correlated with development of food allergy to wheat (85). In the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children, skin sensitization was also linked to food allergy by demonstrating that application of peanut oil to inflamed skin was positively associated with the development of peanut food allergies (16). In this study, maternal consumption of peanuts during pregnancy was not associated with the development of food allergies in the child, and peanut-specific IgE was not detectable in cord blood, suggesting that sensitization to food antigens did not occur in utero. Furthermore, levels of peanut allergens found in breast milk were also not associated with sensitization.

Additional insights into where allergic sensitization takes place have come from the analysis of allergen-specific T cells that become “imprinted” and express specific patterns of homing molecules based on where they are activated and differentiate. In peanut-allergic patients, peanut allergen Ara h 1-specific T cells expressing a memory phenotype also expressed CCR4, a Th2-associated cell trafficking marker (86). In another study, memory T cells from peanut-allergic subjects that expressed the skin-homing marker cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA) showed increased proliferation compared to those that expressed α4β7 integrin, a gastrointestinal-homing marker (87). These data suggest that in peanut allergy, allergic sensitization may occur through the skin.

In addition to allergen exposure, sensitization usually requires the presence of other factors that may function as adjuvants: exogenous adjuvants, bacteria colonization of lesional skin, allergens with intrinsic protease activity, or skin barrier damage or defects (88). Most if not all of these factors elicit the production of cytokines, notably thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), interleukin-33 (IL-33), and interleukin-25 (IL-25) from the epithelium.

5. Animal models of atopic diseases
5.1. Models of atopic dermatitis and skin barrier dysfunction
Several animal models have now been developed to begin to dissect the role of candidate genes in skin barrier function. Spink5 deficiency in mice resulted in perinatal or early postnatal death (89, 90). Similar to the epithelium from individuals with Netherton syndrome, the skin of Spink5 −/− mice had abnormal keratinization and detachment of the stratum corneum from the underlying layer of the skin. Loss of LEKTI activity resulted in elevated proteolytic activity, destabilization of desmosomes, and dysregulated processing of corneodesmosin (89–91). Mice lacking corneodesmosin also had early postnatal lethality and showed detachment of the stratum corneum from the underlying layer (92, 93). Loss of corneodesmosin in adulthood using a skin-specific, inducible CDSN knockout resulted in a severe skin phenotype that ultimately required euthanasia of these mice (93).

“Flaky tail” mice have a frameshift mutation in the filaggrin gene that is analogous to common human FLG mutations and resulted in an almost complete loss of processed filaggrin (94). Flaky tail mice appeared normal at birth, but as neonates, they developed dry, flaky skin, shortened ears, and tail constrictions that sometimes resulted in autoamputation (95–97). There was then a gradual improvement of phenotype, and flaky tail mice appeared normal by two to three weeks of age (97). Topical application of a model allergen to intact skin of flaky tail mice was sufficient to induce cutaneous inflammatory infiltrates, allergen-specific IgE, and cytokine responses similar to those seen in human atopic dermatitis (94, 98). Although initial studies did not demonstrate lung inflammation after subsequent pulmonary challenge (94), other studies have shown an IL-33-mediated eosinophilic esophagitis after intranasal antigen challenge of sensitized flaky tail mice (99).

5.2. Models of skin sensitization in the atopic march
Most methods of skin sensitization in mice rely on disruption of the skin or initiation of inflammation that occurs concurrently with allergen introduction. In this section, we briefly review commonly used approaches of sensitization in mouse models of the atopic march. Ovalbumin (OVA) is frequently used as a model antigen; application of OVA on the skin after barrier disruption with shaving and 70% ethyl alcohol can result in induction of OVA-specific IgE and IgG1 and immediate cutaneous responses on subsequent intradermal challenge with OVA (100). In a similar manner, epicutaneous (EC) sensitization to OVA through tape stripping can lead to the development of dermatitis. Mice sensitized through tape stripping subsequently developed eosinophilia in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and increased airway responsiveness after challenge with aerosolized OVA (101). Vitamin D (1α,25-(OH)2D3) or low calcemic vitamin D analogues (MC903) can also be used to induce atopic dermatitis-like skin inflammation, in part through induction of keratinocyte-derived TSLP (102). Some studies have now used overexpression or injection of epithelial cell-derived cytokines such as TSLP to induce local skin inflammation and sensitization (103–105).

Unlike the model antigen OVA, allergens that have intrinsic protease activity can induce sensitization when applied to healthy intact skin. A primary example of this is peanut (106). After epicutaneous exposure to peanut protein, a single oral antigen challenge can induce anaphylaxis (107). Application of Ara h2, the dominant allergen in peanut, is in fact sufficient to induce IgE production, anaphylaxis, and sensitization (106). Subsequent studies that use these methods of skin sensitization have examined the cytokine pathways and cellular requirements of allergen sensitization and challenge.

6. Epithelial cell-derived cytokines and the atopic march
Three epithelial cell-derived cytokines – thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), interleukin-33 (IL-33), and interleukin-25 (IL-25) – have emerged as potent inducers of type 2 inflammation at barrier sites. In the sections that follow, we provide an overview of TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 with an emphasis on their role in allergic sensitization in the skin and in mouse models of the atopic march.

6.1. Thymic stromal lymphopoeitin (TSLP)
Murine TSLP was initially discovered as a thymic stromal cell line-derived growth factor that supported immature B-cell proliferation and development (108, 109). Subsequently, a human homolog was identified by using in silico methods (110, 111). TSLP binds to a heterodimeric receptor consisting of the IL-7 receptor α-chain and the TSLP receptor chain (TSLPR) to exert its biological activity on a broad range of cell types. A primary target for TSLP is thought to be dendritic cells (DCs), which upregulate OX40L, CD80, and CD86 in response to TSLP; TSLP-treated DCs can drive IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 production from naïve CD4+ T cells upon co-culture (112, 113). In addition to its effects on Th2 cell polarization through antigen presenting cells, TSLP can also act directly on CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, and Treg cells. TSLP induced proliferation of T cells and Th2 cells (114, 115). TSLP-mediated inflammation was able to protect against cutaneous carcinogenesis by acting directly on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (116, 117). Loss of TSLPR signaling specifically in Treg cells inhibited their activation and resulted in a severe systemic response (118). TSLP can also promote Th2 cytokine responses through its actions on mast cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), epithelial cells, macrophages (119), and basophils (120–124). Together with IL-1 and tumor necrosis factor, TSLP can costimulate the activation of human mast cells to induce Th2 cytokines (121). In vitro, TSLP could induce basophil maturation from bone marrow precursors in an IL-3 independent manner; furthermore, TSLP-elicited basophils in vivo were phenotypically distinct from IL-3-elicited basophils (125).

TSLP is expressed at basal levels in the lung, tonsils, and intestines (126, 127) (128). Its expression can be further enhanced through exposure to viral, bacterial, or parasitic pathogens as well as TLR agonists (129). Although TSLP expression was undetectable in normal skin, it was found to be highly expressed in the lesional skin of individual with atopic dermatitis (130), in skin biopsies from patients with peeling skin syndrome type B (131), and in the airways of asthmatics (132). TSLP levels in asthmatic airways correlated with Th2-attracting chemokine expression and disease severity (132). In eosinophilic esophagitis, a gain-of-function polymorphism in TSLP is associated with disease in pediatric subjects (66, 67), and TSLP expression was higher in esophageal biopsy samples from children with active EoE than in biopsy samples from control subjects or subjects with inactive EoE (133).

Skin-specific overexpression of TSLP under a keratinocyte-specific promoter resulted in a spontaneous atopic dermatitis-like phenotype (134). Keratinocyte-specific deletion of components of Notch signaling led to high levels of TSLP released into systemic circulation (135). In mouse models of skin sensitization, TSLP is induced following tape stripping or topical application of MC903 (a low calcemic analogue of vitamin D3). Skin sensitization in these models drives local skin inflammation that resembles atopic dermatitis. Both TSLP and basophils have been shown to be important in this model, since disease is attenuated in TSLPR knockout mice and in diphtheria toxin (DT)-treated, basophil-depleted Baso-DTR mice (136). Accumulation of basophils in the skin following MC903 treatment was TSLP-dependent and IL-3-independent (137). After sensitization with MC903, antigen challenge in the lung aggravated airway inflammation (138, 139), whereas antigen challenge orally drove esophageal inflammation and eosinophilia or intestinal food allergy (136). In the food allergy model, OVA treatment without MC903 but with concurrent transfer of TSLP-elicited basophils could drive disease upon oral challenge with antigen. TSLP is also involved in disease at challenge, since treatment with TSLP-specific antibody significantly decreased eosinophilia and inflammation in the esophagus, even in established eosinophilic esophagitis (133).

We have developed a model of the atopic march in which skin sensitization is induced through intradermal injection of TSLP in the presence of antigen (104). Unlike with tape stripping and MC903 treatment, circulating levels of TSLP were not detectable after intradermal injection. After skin sensitization, intranasal antigen challenge promoted airway inflammation (104), and oral antigen challenge drove allergic diarrheal disease (105). In the food allergy model, DC-intrinsic TSLP signaling was required to control antigen-specific type 2 responses, since loss of TSLP signaling specifically in DCs led to loss of TSLP-induced allergic diarrhea (105). Diarrheal disease was also attenuated after basophil depletion, either through treatment with Ba103, a monoclonal antibody that binds the activating receptor CD200R3 on basophils and mast cells, or through DT treatment of Mcpt8-DTR transgenic mice (105).

6.2. Interleukin-33 (IL-33)
ST2 (suppression of tumorigenecity 2; also known as IL-1RL1, T1 and IL-33R), the receptor for IL-33, was identified almost three decades ago (140), yet it remained an orphan receptor until the identification of IL-33 as its ligand in 2005 (141). IL-33 is a member of the IL-1 family and binds to a heterodimer formed by ST2 and its co-receptor, IL-1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1RAcP). ST2 was first shown to be selectively expressed by Th2 cells (142). Later studies found ST2 expression on other cell types, including macrophages, dendritic cells, basophils, mast cells, regulatory T cells, and ILC2s (143–147). IL-33 can drive eosinophil differentiation from bone marrow precursors in vitro and stimulate cytokine production in eosinophils and mast cells (148–150). IL-33 can also promote basophil activation and migration (151, 152). In the intestines, IL-33 has been shown to promote regulatory T cell stability and function, and may be a key controller of immune responses during tissue damage (153). In the context of systemic inflammation, such as that occurring during sepsis, IL-33 may be protective (154).

IL-33 is constitutively expressed in the nuclei in human and mouse tissues in steady-state conditions (155, 156), although the role of IL-33 in transcriptional regulation remains controversial and poorly defined. IL-33 lacks a signal sequence that is found in most conventional cytokines; instead, IL-33 release from cells occurs after cell injury and serves as an endogenous danger signal or “alarmin” (155). Although hematopoietic cells can produce IL-33 upon stimulation, the non-hematopoietic compartment appears to be the primary source of IL-33 (157). The expression of IL-33 in skin and airway epithelium can be further increased in atopic dermatitis and during airway inflammation in both humans and mice (158–160). Esophageal biopsies from patients with eosinophilic esophagitis have increased IL1RL1/ST2 gene expression compared to biopsies from control subjects (99). A variety of allergens, bacterial products, viral and helminthic infections, and pollutants such as cigarette smoke have all been shown to be able to induce IL-33 and ST2 expression (157, 161–163).

IL-33 signaling was shown to be important in a model of eosinophilic esophagitis in which mice were sensitized epicutaneously with OVA then challenged intranasally, since disease was attenuated in ST2-deficient mice and in wild-type mice treated with anti-ST2 blocking antibodies (99). Disease was likely basophil but not mast cell dependent, since DT-treated Mcpt8DTR mice had reduced inflammation in this model, whereas Kitw-sh/w-sh mice had esophageal eosinophilia comparable to wild-type mice. Furthermore, transfer of wild-type but not ST2-deficient basophils in DT-treated Mcpt8DTR mice reconstituted disease induction. Thus, an IL-33-basophil axis appears to drive inflammation in this model of eosinophilic esophagitis. Additional studies are required to determine whether the actions of IL-33 on basophils are required in the skin, esophagus, or both in this disease.

ST2 blockade was also shown to attenuate food allergy in both an OVA tape stripping/oral challenge model and a peanut allergy model. In the OVA tape stripping model, mast cells were implicated in driving disease, since OVA-induced anaphylaxis was attenuated in Kitw-sh/w-sh mice, and transfer of bone marrow-derived mast cells from wild-type but not ST2 knockout mice could reconstitute disease in these mice (164). In the peanut allergy model, DCs from the skin-draining lymph nodes of mice treated with anti-ST2 were shown to have decreased ability to prime T cells in vitro compared to DCs from isotype control-treated mice (106).

Skin-specific overexpression of IL-33 can drive spontaneous dermatitis in mice, which is associated with ILC2 infiltration (165). In addition, intradermal IL-33 plus antigen can drive local skin inflammation, and IL-33/OVA sensitized mice developed airway inflammation after intranasal antigen challenge and allergic diarrhea after oral antigen challenge (Han and Ziegler, unpublished data). We found that IL-33 was also required during oral challenge in this model, since antibody blockade of the IL-33 receptor ST2 after skin sensitization prevented acute diarrhea after oral antigen challenge (Han and Ziegler, unpublished data).

6.3. Interleukin-25 (IL-25)
IL-25 (IL-17E) is a member of the IL-17 cytokine family that was originally reported to be expressed by Th2-polarized CD4+ T cells (166). Emerging evidence now indicates that IL-25 is also expressed by epithelial and endothelial cells (167, 168). IL-25 bind to a heteromeric receptor complex of IL-17RA and IL-17RB (169, 170) expressed on a variety of cells including T cells, macrophages, type-2 myeloid cells, epithelial cells, DCs, eosinophils, and ILC2s (145, 167, 171–175).

Tuft cells (also called brush cells), which have been shown to be a potent source of IL-25 in helminthic infections in the gut (176–178) are also a primary source of IL-25 in the lung (176). Exposure to allergens, air pollutants, and infection with helminths can increase IL-25 expression at mucosal sites (167, 179–181). In in vitro cultures, allergens (HDM) and proteases (trypsin and papain) can induce the release of IL-25 by human bronchial epithelial cells (182). IL-25 expression is elevated in the skin of atopic dermatitis patients (183); in the skin, IL-25 can inhibit filaggrin expression at both the mRNA and protein levels and act synergistically with other Th2 cytokines (184, 185).

After OVA plus alum sensitization, IL-25 mRNA was upregulated after oral antigen challenge in models of food allergy. Mice lacking IL-17RB were resistant to allergic diarrhea in an OVA/alum model, and intestinal IL-25 overexpression accelerated disease onset in this model (186). IL-25 mRNA was also upregulated in the lungs after intranasal antigen challenge in murine models of allergic airway disease (180). Neutralization of IL-25 in the lungs with a soluble IL-25R fusion protein inhibited antigen-induced CD4+ T-cell recruitment into the airways, IL-5 and IL-13 production, and goblet cell hyperplasia (181). Overexpression of IL-25 in lung epithelium led to mucus production and airway infiltration of macrophages and eosinophils (167). IL-25 plasma levels are increased and IL-25 receptor components are upregulated on the surface of mature eosinophils following an allergen inhalation challenge (187). Blocking IL-25 in an experimental model of allergic asthma inhibited airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness. Unexpectedly, this antibody specifically prevented AHR even during an ongoing type 2 inflammatory response in the lungs (188). This approach has not yet been studied in asthmatic patients. It is interesting to note that, unlike TSLP and IL-33, intradermal administration of IL-25 plus antigen followed by antigen challenge was not able to promote disease in models of experimental asthma (104) or food allergy (Han and Ziegler, unpublished data). Thus, IL-25 may have distinct function at different tissue sites or during different phases of inflammation.

6.4. The interplay of epithelial cell-derived cytokines
TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33 are made by epithelial cells at mucosal surfaces and share similar target cell populations and inducing stimuli (Figure 1). It is therefore important to understand how these cytokine pathways interact with one another and the extent to which they are functionally distinct. Some studies indicate that there is some cross-regulation at the level of gene expression. These cytokines also show different expression kinetics, suggesting that they may be involved in driving disease at different stages of inflammation. In a T.muris infection model, the kinetics of TSLP expression lagged that seen for IL-33, and intraperitoneal injection of recombinant IL-33 induced cecal expression of TSLP and TSLPR mRNA (189). TSLP mRNA can also be upregulated following epithelial cell-specific overexpression of IL-25 in the lung (167). In a model of chronic HDM exposure, IL-33 mRNA levels were elevated at early and late time points, whereas TSLP mRNA was only upregulated at early time points, and IL-25 mRNA was upregulated only at late time points (190). Reporter mice for TSLP (191), IL-25 (176), and IL-33 (157) may help define the cell-type specific expression kinetics of these cytokines.

Models of allergic inflammation have shown distinct requirements for TSLP, IL-33 and IL-25. After mice were exposed to intranasal HDM or intragastric peanut, IL-33 but not TSLP or IL-25 was required to drive inflammation (192). In these models, IL-33 induced a robust induction of OX40L expression on DCs and expansion of ILCs. Consistent with the findings by Chu and colleagues, IL-33 but not IL-25 was found to be required for airway hyperreactivity after intranasal ragweed challenge, which robustly increased the expression of IL-33, but not IL-25, and expanded IL-13-producing ILC2 in the lung (162). We have found that the TSLP-TSLPR axis is not required in IL-33 driven food allergy; in contrast, mice lacking ST2 or IL-17RB had attenuated disease in TSLP-driven food allergy (105)(Han and Ziegler, unpublished data). IL-33 may play a critical role in amplifying type 2 responses initiated by TSLP, since TSLP induces the accumulation of many inflammatory cells that express the IL-33 receptor and respond to IL-33 (123).

In some cases, different mouse strains have been shown to have distinct cytokine requirements. Several studies have shown that ILC2s are important in allergic responses in the skin and accumulate in the skin of individuals with atopic dermatitis; however, studies in mouse models have demonstrated striking differences in cytokine dependence in C57BL/6 and BALB/c mouse strains. MC903-driven skin inflammation in C57BL/6 mice was dependent on TSLP but not IL-33 or IL-25 (184), whereas inflammation and ILC2 accumulation in the skin in BALB/c mice was only mildly affected by lack of TSLP and was instead dependent on IL-25 (145). BALB/c mice lacking ST2 had an intermediate phenotype between TSLPR knockouts and IL17RB knockouts in MC903-driven disease (145). We have not detected induction of IL-25 or IL-33 mRNA after topical application of MC903 in BALB/c mice (Han and Ziegler, unpublished data); additional studies will be required to determine whether IL-25 and IL-33 may act downstream of TSLP or may be important in amplifying TSLP-mediated Th2 responses in this model.

The type of allergen and the allergen dose and duration of exposure may also affect the requirements for TSLP, IL-33 and IL-25 in allergic responses. In a chronic model of HDM lung inflammation, triple antibody blockade of TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 could ameliorate inflammation if started at the beginning of HDM exposure, but was unable to ameliorate disease once inflammation was already established (190). Use of inducible knockout models may be useful in confirming the results of antibody blockade. In a model of intranasal sensitization and challenge with HDM, blockade of either IL-33 or GM-CSF abolished HDM-induced disease, whereas TSLP was important only when high doses of HDM were administered (193). GM-CSF was also found to be required in a model of cockroach antigen (CRA)-induced airway inflammation (194). In this CRA-induced allergy model, TSLP and IL-25 were not required, and lack of IL-33 only moderately affected CRA-induced inflammation.

Although the roles of TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 are clearly distinct and influenced by a variety of factors, the underlying mechanisms driving these differences and how these cytokines may interact remain poorly defined. Recent work has suggested that DCs and basophils cooperate to promote Th2 differentiation, but that the relative contributions of these two cell types to allergic inflammation may be distinct depending on the stimuli. Otsuka et al. found that basophils drove Th2 differentiation following epicutaneous sensitization with hapten or peptide antigens but not with protein antigens (195). We found that type-2 sensitization using the hapten FITC with dibutyl phthalate (DBP) required TSLP-responsive DCs but that basophils were not involved (196). In type 2 immunity after HDM inhalation, DCs but not basophils have been shown to be required (197). Additional work to define the cellular requirements for allergic sensitization and challenge in animal models may improve our understanding of how and when TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 are required in allergic inflammation. A recent study by Van Dyken and colleagues demonstrated that while Th2 cells could be primed in the absence of TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33, both Th2 lymphocytes and ILC2s needed to “sense” TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33 for robust expression of effector cytokines (198). Thus, epithelial cell-derived cytokines may be signals of local inflammation and tissue damage that serve as important checkpoints in the regulation of allergic inflammation at barrier surfaces.

7. Can the atopic march be halted?
7.1. Early interventions to halt the atopic march
Treatment and prevention strategies in infants and young children with atopic dermatitis are targeted toward treating the symptoms of atopic dermatitis, restoring skin barrier functions, and reducing the absorption of environmental allergens to attempt to attenuate or block the onset of asthma and food allergy. Given that the initiating events in atopic dermatitis remain poorly understood, identifying those at risk and implementing strategies to prevent atopic dermatitis might be impractical. However, the use of emollients soon after birth (before the onset of atopic dermatitis) can reduce the incidence of atopic dermatitis (199, 200), and thus may represent an inexpensive, easy to apply, safe, and effective approach for atopic dermatitis prevention. Maternal diet has not been shown to play a role in sensitization; thus, dietary restrictions are not recommended for pregnant or lactating mothers (201). It is unclear whether the use of anti-inflammatory agents to control atopic dermatitis might be beneficial in decreasing subsequent development of asthma or food allergy.

Several studies have suggested that antihistamine therapy can decrease the risk of subsequent development of asthma in infants with atopic dermatitis, at least in specific risk groups. In infants at high risk of developing asthma, such as those with atopic dermatitis or family history of major allergies plus high IgE, subjects treated with ketotifen, an H1 antihistamine, had a significantly lower frequency of asthma at follow-up than control subjects (202, 203). In infants with atopic dermatitis, early treatment with cetirizine (initiated between one and two years of age) did not show a difference in the development of asthma between cetirizine and placebo in the intention-to-treat population; however, the incidence of asthma was significantly reduced in the subgroups sensitized to grass pollen or house dust mite (204). Although there was a gradual narrowing of the difference in asthma incidence between cetirizine treatment and placebo in the house dust mite-sensitized group, grass pollen-sensitive individuals treated with cetirizine continued to have a lower incidence of asthma than the placebo group up to 18 months after cetirizine treatment stopped (205). Thus, cetirizine may delay or prevent asthma onset, particularly in a subgroup of grass pollen-sensitized children with atopic dermatitis.

7.2. Allergen-specific immunotherapy and tolerance
Subcutaneous allergen-specific immunotherapy (SCIT) has been used in clinical practice for over a century and has efficacy in allergic rhinitis, rhino conjunctivitis, asthma, and hymenoptera venom allergies (206–208). However, SCIT requires repeated injections and carries a risk for anaphylaxis. In particular, initial trials of desensitization to food allergy through SCIT had unacceptably high rates of systemic reactions (209). To increase ease of use and minimize side effects while improving efficacy, other routes for allergen specific immunotherapy have been studied, including epicutaneous immunotherapy (EPIT), sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT), and oral immunotherapy (OIT). The approach to therapy is the same regardless of the route – increasing doses of allergen are administered gradually with the goal of establishing desensitization and ‘immune tolerance’ (210–212).

Allergen-specific immunotherapy has been shown to modify the immune response in several ways that correlate with clinical tolerance to antigen, including suppression of mast cell and basophil degranulation, induction of regulatory T and B cells, and elevation of IgG4 levels(213). It is interesting to note that decreases in IgE levels are not required for improvements in clinical symptoms. Recent studies of OIT have demonstrated efficacy in desensitization for food allergy with similar immunologic changes as those seen for SLIT and SCIT (214, 215). Tolerance to peanut after oral immunotherapy correlated with regulatory T cell induction and epigenetic changes in FOXP3 locus (212). Single-cell gene expression analysis of individual CD4+ T cells throughout oral immunotherapy in a cohort of peanut-allergic subjects also demonstrated an expansion and shift of peanut-specific CD4+ T cells toward an “anergic” Th2 T-cell phenotype (215). Antigen-specific IgG antibodies were also increased after peanut immunotherapy and inhibited FcεRI-mediated basophil activation in a FcγRIIb-dependent manner (216).

Although earlier guidelines have recommended delayed introduction of certain foods in infants at high risk for atopic disease (217), evolving concepts of oral tolerance and subsequent studies correlating early consumption of peanut, cow’s milk, and egg with lower prevalence of food allergies have led to changing views on food consumption in infancy and the risk of atopic disease (218). The Learning Early About Peanut Allergy (LEAP) trial was designed to assess whether early introduction of peanut during infancy, rather than avoidance, prevented the development of peanut allergy. In high-risk atopic infants, sustained peanut consumption dramatically decreased the frequency of the development of peanut allergy at 60 months of age compared with children who completely avoided peanut (219). In a follow-up trial, subjects who consumed peanuts early in life then avoided peanuts for 12 months continued to have a lower prevalence of peanut allergy than those who avoided peanuts (220). Initial population-based studies suggest that early introduction of other foods associated with food allergies, such as cow’s milk, may also be effective in promoting tolerance in high risk infants (221). On the basis of these studies, interim international consensus guidelines were issued to highlight early introduction of peanut in high-risk infants as a primary preventive strategy (222).

In a trial of breast-fed infants who were not necessarily at high risk for atopic disease, early introduction of six allergenic foods (peanut, cooked egg, cow’s milk, sesame, whitefish, and wheat) was shown to be safe (223). Although the intention-to-treat analysis did not reach significance, the prevalence of peanut allergy and egg allergy was significantly lower in the early-introduction group than in the standard-introduction group in per-protocol analyses. Thus, approaches to promoting tolerance in allergy have shown promising results but require further study.

7.3. Epithelial cell-derived cytokines as new therapeutic targets
In recent years, biological therapies have been developed that more specifically target the allergic immune response. Omalizumab is a humanized anti-IgE monoclonal antibody that prevents the binding of IgE to Fc receptors on basophils and mast cells and was the first biologic treatment approved for the treatment of allergic asthma (224). Although omalizumab is not FDA-approved for allergic rhinitis, it has shown some efficacy in the treatment of both seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis (225). Initial food allergy treatment studies have shown that the addition of omalizumab to OIT may improve safety, although efficacy may be comparable to OIT alone (226, 227). Therapeutic blockade of type 2 effector cytokines such as IL-4, IL-5, IL-9 and IL-13 has now also been examined in clinical trials, and the results from some of these studies have been promising (228). Additional studies are needed to establish the efficacy and durability of therapeutic responses after treatment with these cytokine-blocking antibodies.

The targeting of epithelial cell-derived cytokines such as TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33 has emerged as a novel therapeutic strategy in allergic disease intervention. Since these cytokines have immunoregulatory roles beyond their function in allergic responses, blockade of these epithelial cell-derived cytokines should be practiced with caution; however, the targeting of TSLP, IL-25 and/or IL-33 may prove to have increased efficacy compared to targeting effector cytokines such as IL-4 or IL-13 in allergic disease treatment. Animal models have demonstrated important roles for these epithelial cell-derived cytokines during both early skin inflammation and subsequent lung or gastrointestinal allergic responses. In addition, blockade of these cytokines can attenuate disease in these models. Thus, TSLP, IL-25 and/or IL-33 blockade may be able to treat active disease and prevent further development of the atopic march. Blockade of IL-25 or IL-33 has not yet been studied in clinical trials for allergic diseases; however, a recent trial of anti-TSLP blockade has shown encouraging results. AMG 157 is a human anti-TSLP monoclonal immunoglobulin G2λ that blocks the binding of TSLP to its receptor. In a clinical, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 5 to 12 weeks of treatment with AMG 157 blunted asthma attacks evoked by the inhalation of allergens (229). Treatment with AMG 157 also decreased levels of sputum eosinophils before and after allergen challenge, thus blocking both the early and late asthmatic responses in this study. Studies are currently underway to test whether AMG 157, in combination with allergen-specific immunotherapy, can promote lasting tolerance to cat allergen (230).

8. Conclusion
The development of atopic dermatitis early in life predisposes children to subsequent development of food allergy, allergic rhinitis, and asthma – a phenomenon known as the “atopic march.” Data from epidemiologic studies and animal models suggest that skin barrier defects that allow increased exposure and sensitization to allergens may be important factors in the march from allergic skin inflammation to disease at other sites. It is increasingly apparent that the epithelium at barrier sites is not only a protective lining but is also an important source of cytokines such as TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 that may initiate and drive type 2 inflammation at these sites. Further studies are needed to clarify the specific roles of these cytokines in the atopic march. While some level of redundancy exists, animal models have demonstrated that TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 do play distinct roles in allergic inflammation. The requirements for these epithelial cytokines in both the initiation and maintenance of inflammation make them attractive targets for therapy.

Support was provided by NIH grants R01AI068731, U19AI125378, and R01AI124220 (to S. F. Z.).

Conflict of Interest: H.H., F.R., and S.F.Z. declare no financial or commercial conflict of interest.

Figure 1 A model of barrier disruption and skin sensitization
Allergens, infections, and tissue damage can all stimulate release of TSLP, IL-33, and IL-25 from the epithelium. These epithelial cell-derived cytokines license DCs to drive type 2 responses but also act on a variety of cell types, including basophils, eosinophils, mast cells and ILCs to initiate and maintain allergic inflammation.


   1 
            Coca AF  
            Cooke RA  
           On the Classification of the Phenomena of Hypersensitiveness J Immunol 1923 8 163 182 
2 
            Wahn U  
           What drives the allergic march? Allergy 2000 55 591 599 10921457 
3 
            Rhodes HL  
            Sporik R  
            Thomas P  
            Holgate ST  
            Cogswell JJ  
           Early life risk factors for adult asthma: a birth cohort study of subjects at risk J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001 108 720 725 11692095 
4 
            Rhodes HL  
            Thomas P  
            Sporik R  
            Holgate ST  
            Cogswell JJ  
           A birth cohort study of subjects at risk of atopy: twenty-two-year follow-up of wheeze and atopic status Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002 165 176 180 11790650 
5 
            Burks AW  
            Tang M  
            Sicherer S  
             
           ICON: food allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2012 129 906 920 22365653 
6 
            Sicherer SH  
            Leung DY  
           Advances in allergic skin disease, anaphylaxis, and hypersensitivity reactions to foods, drugs, and insects in 2013 J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 133 324 334 24373349 
7 
            Rance F  
           Food allergy in children suffering from atopic eczema Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2008 19 279 284 quiz 285 18397414 
8 
            Abonia JP  
            Rothenberg ME  
           Eosinophilic esophagitis: rapidly advancing insights Annu Rev Med 2012 63 421 434 22034864 
9 
            Eller E  
            Kjaer HF  
            Host A  
            Andersen KE  
            Bindslev-Jensen C  
           Development of atopic dermatitis in the DARC birth cohort Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2010 21 307 314 19788539 
10 
            Kay J  
            Gawkrodger DJ  
            Mortimer MJ  
            Jaron AG  
           The prevalence of childhood atopic eczema in a general population J Am Acad Dermatol 1994 30 35 39 8277028 
11 
            Kulig M  
            Bergmann R  
            Klettke U  
            Wahn V  
            Tacke U  
            Wahn U  
           Natural course of sensitization to food and inhalant allergens during the first 6 years of life J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999 103 1173 1179 10359902 
12 
            Keil T  
            Bockelbrink A  
            Reich A  
             
           The natural history of allergic rhinitis in childhood Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2010 21 962 969 20487364 
13 
            Yunginger JW  
            Reed CE  
            O’Connell EJ  
            Melton LJ 3rd  
            O’Fallon WM  
            Silverstein MD  
           A community-based study of the epidemiology of asthma. Incidence rates, 1964–1983 Am Rev Respir Dis 1992 146 888 894 1416415 
14 
            Phelan PD  
            Robertson CF  
            Olinsky A  
           The Melbourne Asthma Study: 1964–1999 J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002 109 189 194 11842286 
15 
            Morgan WJ  
            Stern DA  
            Sherrill DL  
             
           Outcome of asthma and wheezing in the first 6 years of life: follow-up through adolescence Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005 172 1253 1258 16109980 
16 
            Lack G  
            Fox D  
            Northstone K  
            Golding J  
            Avon Longitudinal Study of P, Children Study T 
           Factors associated with the development of peanut allergy in childhood N Engl J Med 2003 348 977 985 12637607 
17 
            Tsakok T  
            Marrs T  
            Mohsin M  
            Baron S  
            du Toit G  
            Till S  
            Flohr C  
           Does atopic dermatitis cause food allergy? A systematic review J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016 137 1071 1078 26897122 
18 
            Brough HA  
            Liu AH  
            Sicherer S  
             
           Atopic dermatitis increases the effect of exposure to peanut antigen in dust on peanut sensitization and likely peanut allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015 135 164 170 25457149 
19 
            Brough HA  
            Simpson A  
            Makinson K  
             
           Peanut allergy: effect of environmental peanut exposure in children with filaggrin loss-of-function mutations J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 134 867 875 e861 25282568 
20 
            von Kobyletzki LB  
            Bornehag CG  
            Hasselgren M  
            Larsson M  
            Lindstrom CB  
            Svensson A  
           Eczema in early childhood is strongly associated with the development of asthma and rhinitis in a prospective cohort BMC Dermatol 2012 12 11 22839963 
21 
            Gustafsson D  
            Sjoberg O  
            Foucard T  
           Development of allergies and asthma in infants and young children with atopic dermatitis–a prospective follow-up to 7 years of age Allergy 2000 55 240 245 10753014 
22 
            Beasley R  
           Worldwide variations in the prevalence of asthma symptoms: the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC) Eur Respir J 1998 12 315 335 9727780 
23 
            Aberg N  
            Hesselmar B  
            Aberg B  
            Eriksson B  
           Increase of asthma, allergic rhinitis and eczema in Swedish schoolchildren between 1979 and 1991 Clin Exp Allergy 1995 25 815 819 8564719 
24 
            Burr ML  
            Butland BK  
            King S  
            Vaughan-Williams E  
           Changes in asthma prevalence: two surveys 15 years apart Arch Dis Child 1989 64 1452 1456 2817930 
25 
            Sears MR  
            Rea HH  
           Asthma mortality: comparison between New Zealand and England Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1987 294 646 
26 
            Eichenfield LF  
            Hanifin JM  
            Beck LA  
            Lemanske RF Jr  
            Sampson HA  
            Weiss ST  
            Leung DY  
           Atopic dermatitis and asthma: parallels in the evolution of treatment Pediatrics 2003 111 608 616 12612244 
27 
            Strachan DP  
           Hay fever, hygiene, and household size BMJ 1989 299 1259 1260 2513902 
28 
            Schmitz R  
            Atzpodien K  
            Schlaud M  
           Prevalence and risk factors of atopic diseases in German children and adolescents Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2012 23 716 723 22882467 
29 
            Strachan DP  
           Allergy and family size: a riddle worth solving Clin Exp Allergy 1997 27 235 236 9088647 
30 
            Ball TM  
            Castro-Rodriguez JA  
            Griffith KA  
            Holberg CJ  
            Martinez FD  
            Wright AL  
           Siblings, day-care attendance, and the risk of asthma and wheezing during childhood N Engl J Med 2000 343 538 543 10954761 
31 
            Stevens W  
            Addo-Yobo E  
            Roper J  
            Woodcock A  
            James H  
            Platts-Mills T  
            Custovic A  
           Differences in both prevalence and titre of specific immunoglobulin E among children with asthma in affluent and poor communities within a large town in Ghana Clin Exp Allergy 2011 41 1587 1594 21810123 
32 
            Addo Yobo EO  
            Custovic A  
            Taggart SC  
            Asafo-Agyei AP  
            Woodcock A  
           Exercise induced bronchospasm in Ghana: differences in prevalence between urban and rural schoolchildren Thorax 1997 52 161 165 9059478 
33 
            Addo-Yobo EO  
            Woodcock A  
            Allotey A  
            Baffoe-Bonnie B  
            Strachan D  
            Custovic A  
           Exercise-induced bronchospasm and atopy in Ghana: two surveys ten years apart PLoS Med 2007 4 e70 17326711 
34 
            Addo-Yobo EO  
            Custovic A  
            Taggart SC  
            Craven M  
            Bonnie B  
            Woodcock A  
           Risk factors for asthma in urban Ghana J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001 108 363 368 11544454 
35 
            Endara P  
            Vaca M  
            Platts-Mills TA  
             
           Effect of urban vs. rural residence on the association between atopy and wheeze in Latin America: findings from a case-control analysis Clin Exp Allergy 2015 45 438 447 25200287 
36 
            Perzanowski MS  
            Ng’ang’a LW  
            Carter MC  
             
           Atopy, asthma, and antibodies to Ascaris among rural and urban children in Kenya J Pediatr 2002 140 582 588 12032526 
37 
            Bisgaard H  
            Hermansen MN  
            Buchvald F  
             
           Childhood asthma after bacterial colonization of the airway in neonates N Engl J Med 2007 357 1487 1495 17928596 
38 
            Ege MJ  
            Mayer M  
            Normand AC  
             
           Exposure to environmental microorganisms and childhood asthma N Engl J Med 2011 364 701 709 21345099 
39 
            Stein MM  
            Hrusch CL  
            Gozdz J  
             
           Innate Immunity and Asthma Risk in Amish and Hutterite Farm Children N Engl J Med 2016 375 411 421 27518660 
40 
            Schuijs MJ  
            Willart MA  
            Vergote K  
             
           Farm dust and endotoxin protect against allergy through A20 induction in lung epithelial cells Science 2015 349 1106 1110 26339029 
41 
            Lluis A  
            Ballenberger N  
            Illi S  
             
           Regulation of TH17 markers early in life through maternal farm exposure J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 133 864 871 24275363 
42 
            Duffy DL  
            Martin NG  
            Battistutta D  
            Hopper JL  
            Mathews JD  
           Genetics of asthma and hay fever in Australian twins Am Rev Respir Dis 1990 142 1351 1358 2252253 
43 
            Ullemar V  
            Lundholm C  
            Almqvist C  
           Twins’ risk of childhood asthma mediated by gestational age and birthweight Clin Exp Allergy 2015 45 1328 1336 25845700 
44 
            Elmose C  
            Thomsen SF  
           Twin Studies of Atopic Dermatitis: Interpretations and Applications in the Filaggrin Era J Allergy (Cairo) 2015 2015 902359 26448767 
45 
            Smith FJ  
            Irvine AD  
            Terron-Kwiatkowski A  
             
           Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding filaggrin cause ichthyosis vulgaris Nat Genet 2006 38 337 342 16444271 
46 
            Palmer CN  
            Irvine AD  
            Terron-Kwiatkowski A  
             
           Common loss-of-function variants of the epidermal barrier protein filaggrin are a major predisposing factor for atopic dermatitis Nat Genet 2006 38 441 446 16550169 
47 
            Brown SJ  
            Asai Y  
            Cordell HJ  
             
           Loss-of-function variants in the filaggrin gene are a significant risk factor for peanut allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011 127 661 667 21377035 
48 
            Venkataraman D  
            Soto-Ramirez N  
            Kurukulaaratchy RJ  
             
           Filaggrin loss-of-function mutations are associated with food allergy in childhood and adolescence J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 134 876 882 e874 25174864 
49 
            Basu K  
            Palmer CN  
            Lipworth BJ  
             
           Filaggrin null mutations are associated with increased asthma exacerbations in children and young adults Allergy 2008 63 1211 1217 18307574 
50 
            Palmer CN  
            Ismail T  
            Lee SP  
             
           Filaggrin null mutations are associated with increased asthma severity in children and young adults J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007 120 64 68 17531295 
51 
            Henderson J  
            Northstone K  
            Lee SP  
             
           The burden of disease associated with filaggrin mutations: a population-based, longitudinal birth cohort study J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 121 872 877 e879 18325573 
52 
            Walley AJ  
            Chavanas S  
            Moffatt MF  
             
           Gene polymorphism in Netherton and common atopic disease Nat Genet 2001 29 175 178 11544479 
53 
            Chavanas S  
            Bodemer C  
            Rochat A  
             
           Mutations in SPINK5, encoding a serine protease inhibitor, cause Netherton syndrome Nat Genet 2000 25 141 142 10835624 
54 
            Kubo A  
            Nagao K  
            Amagai M  
           Epidermal barrier dysfunction and cutaneous sensitization in atopic diseases J Clin Invest 2012 122 440 447 22293182 
55 
            Netherton EW  
           A unique case of trichorrhexis nodosa; bamboo hairs AMA Arch Derm 1958 78 483 487 13582191 
56 
            Kusunoki T  
            Okafuji I  
            Yoshioka T  
             
           SPINK5 polymorphism is associated with disease severity and food allergy in children with atopic dermatitis J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005 115 636 638 15753919 
57 
            Kato A  
            Fukai K  
            Oiso N  
            Hosomi N  
            Murakami T  
            Ishii M  
           Association of SPINK5 gene polymorphisms with atopic dermatitis in the Japanese population Br J Dermatol 2003 148 665 669 12752122 
58 
            Teye K  
            Suga Y  
            Numata S  
             
           A founder deletion of corneodesmosin gene is prevalent in Japanese patients with peeling skin disease: Identification of 2 new cases J Dermatol Sci 2016 82 134 137 26867961 
59 
            Telem DF  
            Israeli S  
            Sarig O  
            Sprecher E  
           Inflammatory peeling skin syndrome caused a novel mutation in CDSN Arch Dermatol Res 2012 304 251 255 22146835 
60 
            Israeli S  
            Zamir H  
            Sarig O  
            Bergman R  
            Sprecher E  
           Inflammatory peeling skin syndrome caused by a mutation in CDSN encoding corneodesmosin J Invest Dermatol 2011 131 779 781 21191406 
61 
            Oji V  
            Eckl KM  
            Aufenvenne K  
             
           Loss of corneodesmosin leads to severe skin barrier defect, pruritus, and atopy: unraveling the peeling skin disease Am J Hum Genet 2010 87 274 281 20691404 
62 
            De Benedetto A  
            Qualia CM  
            Baroody FM  
            Beck LA  
           Filaggrin expression in oral, nasal, and esophageal mucosa J Invest Dermatol 2008 128 1594 1597 18172455 
63 
            Simon D  
            Radonjic-Hosli S  
            Straumann A  
            Yousefi S  
            Simon HU  
           Active eosinophilic esophagitis is characterized by epithelial barrier defects and eosinophil extracellular trap formation Allergy 2015 70 443 452 25620273 
64 
            Uhlen M  
            Fagerberg L  
            Hallstrom BM  
             
           Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome Science 2015 347 1260419 25613900 
65 The Human Protein ATLAS. CDSN.


66 
            Rothenberg ME  
            Spergel JM  
            Sherrill JD  
             
           Common variants at 5q22 associate with pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis Nat Genet 2010 42 289 291 20208534 
67 
            Sherrill JD  
            Gao PS  
            Stucke EM  
             
           Variants of thymic stromal lymphopoietin and its receptor associate with eosinophilic esophagitis J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010 126 160 165 e163 20620568 
68 
            Miyake Y  
            Hitsumoto S  
            Tanaka K  
            Arakawa M  
           Association Between TSLP Polymorphisms and Eczema in Japanese Women: the Kyushu Okinawa Maternal and Child Health Study Inflammation 2015 38 1663 1668 25700684 
69 
            Harada M  
            Hirota T  
            Jodo AI  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin gene promoter polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to bronchial asthma Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2011 44 787 793 20656951 
70 
            Shimizu M  
            Matsuda A  
            Yanagisawa K  
             
           Functional SNPs in the distal promoter of the ST2 gene are associated with atopic dermatitis Hum Mol Genet 2005 14 2919 2927 16118232 
71 
            Savenije OE  
            Mahachie John JM  
            Granell R  
             
           Association of IL33-IL-1 receptor-like 1 (IL1RL1) pathway polymorphisms with wheezing phenotypes and asthma in childhood J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 134 170 177 24568840 
72 
            Moffatt MF  
            Gut IG  
            Demenais F  
             
           A large-scale, consortium-based genomewide association study of asthma N Engl J Med 2010 363 1211 1221 20860503 
73 
            Hong X  
            Hao K  
            Ladd-Acosta C  
             
           Genome-wide association study identifies peanut allergy-specific loci and evidence of epigenetic mediation in US children Nat Commun 2015 6 6304 25710614 
74 
            Leung DY  
           Clinical implications of new mechanistic insights into atopic dermatitis Curr Opin Pediatr 2016 28 456 462 27191525 
75 
            Weidinger S  
            Willis-Owen SA  
            Kamatani Y  
             
           A genome-wide association study of atopic dermatitis identifies loci with overlapping effects on asthma and psoriasis Hum Mol Genet 2013 22 4841 4856 23886662 
76 
            Marenholz I  
            Esparza-Gordillo J  
            Ruschendorf F  
             
           Meta-analysis identifies seven susceptibility loci involved in the atopic march Nat Commun 2015 6 8804 26542096 
77 
            Furuhashi M  
            Sugiura K  
            Katsumata Y  
            Oda H  
            Murase Y  
            Imai N  
           Cord blood IgE against milk and egg antigens Biol Neonate 1997 72 210 215 9339292 
78 
            Verhasselt V  
            Milcent V  
            Cazareth J  
             
           Breast milk-mediated transfer of an antigen induces tolerance and protection from allergic asthma Nat Med 2008 14 170 175 18223654 
79 
            Adkins B  
            Leclerc C  
            Marshall-Clarke S  
           Neonatal adaptive immunity comes of age Nat Rev Immunol 2004 4 553 564 15229474 
80 
            Bello D  
            Herrick CA  
            Smith TJ  
             
           Skin exposure to isocyanates: reasons for concern Environ Health Perspect 2007 115 328 335 17431479 
81 
            Tinkle SS  
            Antonini JM  
            Rich BA  
            Roberts JR  
            Salmen R  
            DePree K  
            Adkins EJ  
           Skin as a route of exposure and sensitization in chronic beryllium disease Environ Health Perspect 2003 111 1202 1208 12842774 
82 
            Lademann J  
            Weigmann H  
            Rickmeyer C  
            Barthelmes H  
            Schaefer H  
            Mueller G  
            Sterry W  
           Penetration of titanium dioxide microparticles in a sunscreen formulation into the horny layer and the follicular orifice Skin Pharmacol Appl Skin Physiol 1999 12 247 256 10461093 
83 
            Tan MH  
            Commens CA  
            Burnett L  
            Snitch PJ  
           A pilot study on the percutaneous absorption of microfine titanium dioxide from sunscreens Australas J Dermatol 1996 37 185 187 8961584 
84 
            Blundell G  
            Henderson WJ  
            Price EW  
           Soil particles in the tissues of the foot in endemic elephantiasis of the lower legs Ann Trop Med Parasitol 1989 83 381 385 2604475 
85 
            Fukutomi Y  
            Taniguchi M  
            Nakamura H  
            Akiyama K  
           Epidemiological link between wheat allergy and exposure to hydrolyzed wheat protein in facial soap Allergy 2014 69 1405 1411 25040662 
86 
            DeLong JH  
            Simpson KH  
            Wambre E  
            James EA  
            Robinson D  
            Kwok WW  
           Ara h 1-reactive T cells in individuals with peanut allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011 127 1211 1218 e1213 21459424 
87 
            Chan SM  
            Turcanu V  
            Stephens AC  
            Fox AT  
            Grieve AP  
            Lack G  
           Cutaneous lymphocyte antigen and alpha4beta7 T-lymphocyte responses are associated with peanut allergy and tolerance in children Allergy 2012 67 336 342 22423373 
88 
            Dunkin D  
            Berin MC  
            Mayer L  
           Allergic sensitization can be induced via multiple physiologic routes in an adjuvant-dependent manner J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011 128 1251 1258 e1252 21762973 
89 
            Yang T  
            Liang D  
            Koch PJ  
            Hohl D  
            Kheradmand F  
            Overbeek PA  
           Epidermal detachment, desmosomal dissociation, and destabilization of corneodesmosin in Spink5−/− mice Genes Dev 2004 18 2354 2358 15466487 
90 
            Descargues P  
            Deraison C  
            Bonnart C  
             
           Spink5-deficient mice mimic Netherton syndrome through degradation of desmoglein 1 by epidermal protease hyperactivity Nat Genet 2005 37 56 65 15619623 
91 
            Descargues P  
            Deraison C  
            Prost C  
             
           Corneodesmosomal cadherins are preferential targets of stratum corneum trypsin- and chymotrypsin-like hyperactivity in Netherton syndrome J Invest Dermatol 2006 126 1622 1632 16628198 
92 
            Matsumoto M  
            Zhou Y  
            Matsuo S  
             
           Targeted deletion of the murine corneodesmosin gene delineates its essential role in skin and hair physiology Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105 6720 6724 18436651 
93 
            Leclerc EA  
            Huchenq A  
            Mattiuzzo NR  
             
           Corneodesmosin gene ablation induces lethal skin-barrier disruption and hair-follicle degeneration related to desmosome dysfunction J Cell Sci 2009 122 2699 2709 19596793 
94 
            Fallon PG  
            Sasaki T  
            Sandilands A  
             
           A homozygous frameshift mutation in the mouse Flg gene facilitates enhanced percutaneous allergen priming Nat Genet 2009 41 602 608 19349982 
95 
            Lane PW  
           Two new mutations in linkage group XVI of the house mouse. Flaky tail and varitint-waddler-J J Hered 1972 63 135 140 4557539 
96 
            Sundberg JP  
            Dunstan RW  
            Roop DR  
            Beamer WG  
           Full-thickness skin grafts from flaky skin mice to nude mice: maintenance of the psoriasiform phenotype J Invest Dermatol 1994 102 781 788 8176263 
97 
            Presland RB  
            Boggess D  
            Lewis SP  
            Hull C  
            Fleckman P  
            Sundberg JP  
           Loss of normal profilaggrin and filaggrin in flaky tail (ft/ft) mice: an animal model for the filaggrin-deficient skin disease ichthyosis vulgaris J Invest Dermatol 2000 115 1072 1081 11121144 
98 
            Moniaga CS  
            Egawa G  
            Kawasaki H  
             
           Flaky tail mouse denotes human atopic dermatitis in the steady state and by topical application with Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus extract Am J Pathol 2010 176 2385 2393 20304960 
99 
            Venturelli N  
            Lexmond WS  
            Ohsaki A  
            Nurko S  
            Karasuyama H  
            Fiebiger E  
            Oyoshi MK  
           Allergic skin sensitization promotes eosinophilic esophagitis through the IL-33-basophil axis in mice J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016 138 1367 1380 e1365 27233150 
100 
            Saloga J  
            Renz H  
            Larsen GL  
            Gelfand EW  
           Increased airways responsiveness in mice depends on local challenge with antigen Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994 149 65 70 8111600 
101 
            Spergel JM  
            Mizoguchi E  
            Brewer JP  
            Martin TR  
            Bhan AK  
            Geha RS  
           Epicutaneous sensitization with protein antigen induces localized allergic dermatitis and hyperresponsiveness to methacholine after single exposure to aerosolized antigen in mice J Clin Invest 1998 101 1614 1622 9541491 
102 
            Li M  
            Hener P  
            Zhang Z  
            Kato S  
            Metzger D  
            Chambon P  
           Topical vitamin D3 and low-calcemic analogs induce thymic stromal lymphopoietin in mouse keratinocytes and trigger an atopic dermatitis Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 103 11736 11741 16880407 
103 
            Jessup HK  
            Brewer AW  
            Omori M  
             
           Intradermal administration of thymic stromal lymphopoietin induces a T cell- and eosinophil-dependent systemic Th2 inflammatory response J Immunol 2008 181 4311 4319 18768889 
104 
            Han H  
            Xu W  
            Headley MB  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP)-mediated dermal inflammation aggravates experimental asthma Mucosal Immunol 2012 5 342 351 22354320 
105 
            Han H  
            Thelen TD  
            Comeau MR  
            Ziegler SF  
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin-mediated epicutaneous inflammation promotes acute diarrhea and anaphylaxis J Clin Invest 2014 124 5442 5452 25365222 
106 
            Tordesillas L  
            Goswami R  
            Benede S  
             
           Skin exposure promotes a Th2-dependent sensitization to peanut allergens J Clin Invest 2014 124 4965 4975 25295541 
107 
            Strid J  
            Hourihane J  
            Kimber I  
            Callard R  
            Strobel S  
           Epicutaneous exposure to peanut protein prevents oral tolerance and enhances allergic sensitization Clin Exp Allergy 2005 35 757 766 15969667 
108 
            Friend SL  
            Hosier S  
            Nelson A  
            Foxworthe D  
            Williams DE  
            Farr A  
           A thymic stromal cell line supports in vitro development of surface IgM+ B cells and produces a novel growth factor affecting B and T lineage cells Exp Hematol 1994 22 321 328 8112430 
109 
            Sims JE  
            Williams DE  
            Morrissey PJ  
             
           Molecular cloning and biological characterization of a novel murine lymphoid growth factor J Exp Med 2000 192 671 680 10974033 
110 
            Ray RJ  
            Furlonger C  
            Williams DE  
            Paige CJ  
           Characterization of thymic stromal-derived lymphopoietin (TSLP) in murine B cell development in vitro Eur J Immunol 1996 26 10 16 8566050 
111 
            Reche PA  
            Soumelis V  
            Gorman DM  
             
           Human thymic stromal lymphopoietin preferentially stimulates myeloid cells J Immunol 2001 167 336 343 11418668 
112 
            Ito T  
            Wang YH  
            Duramad O  
             
           TSLP-activated dendritic cells induce an inflammatory T helper type 2 cell response through OX40 ligand J Exp Med 2005 202 1213 1223 16275760 
113 
            Liu YJ  
            Soumelis V  
            Watanabe N  
             
           TSLP: an epithelial cell cytokine that regulates T cell differentiation by conditioning dendritic cell maturation Annu Rev Immunol 2007 25 193 219 17129180 
114 
            Omori M  
            Ziegler S  
           Induction of IL-4 expression in CD4(+) T cells by thymic stromal lymphopoietin J Immunol 2007 178 1396 1404 17237387 
115 
            Kitajima M  
            Lee HC  
            Nakayama T  
            Ziegler SF  
           TSLP enhances the function of helper type 2 cells Eur J Immunol 2011 41 1862 1871 21484783 
116 
            Di Piazza M  
            Nowell CS  
            Koch U  
            Durham AD  
            Radtke F  
           Loss of cutaneous TSLP-dependent immune responses skews the balance of inflammation from tumor protective to tumor promoting Cancer Cell 2012 22 479 493 23079658 
117 
            Demehri S  
            Turkoz A  
            Manivasagam S  
            Yockey LJ  
            Turkoz M  
            Kopan R  
           Elevated epidermal thymic stromal lymphopoietin levels establish an antitumor environment in the skin Cancer Cell 2012 22 494 505 23079659 
118 
            Kashiwagi M  
            Hosoi J  
            Lai JF  
            Brissette J  
            Ziegler SF  
            Morgan BA  
            Georgopoulos K  
           Direct control of regulatory T cells by keratinocytes Nat Immunol 2017 18 334 343 28092372 
119 
            Han H  
            Headley MB  
            Xu W  
            Comeau MR  
            Zhou B  
            Ziegler SF  
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin amplifies the differentiation of alternatively activated macrophages J Immunol 2013 190 904 912 23275605 
120 
            Allakhverdi Z  
            Comeau MR  
            Jessup HK  
            Delespesse G  
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin as a mediator of crosstalk between bronchial smooth muscles and mast cells J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009 123 958 960 e952 19348931 
121 
            Allakhverdi Z  
            Comeau MR  
            Jessup HK  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin is released by human epithelial cells in response to microbes, trauma, or inflammation and potently activates mast cells J Exp Med 2007 204 253 258 17242164 
122 
            Kim BS  
            Siracusa MC  
            Saenz SA  
             
           TSLP elicits IL-33-independent innate lymphoid cell responses to promote skin inflammation Sci Transl Med 2013 5 170ra116 
123 
            Ziegler SF  
            Artis D  
           Sensing the outside world: TSLP regulates barrier immunity Nat Immunol 2010 11 289 293 20300138 
124 
            Reardon C  
            Lechmann M  
            Brustle A  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoetin-induced expression of the endogenous inhibitory enzyme SLPI mediates recovery from colonic inflammation Immunity 2011 35 223 235 21820333 
125 
            Siracusa MC  
            Saenz SA  
            Hill DA  
             
           TSLP promotes interleukin-3-independent basophil haematopoiesis and type 2 inflammation Nature 2011 477 229 233 21841801 
126 
            Watanabe N  
            Hanabuchi S  
            Soumelis V  
            Yuan W  
            Ho S  
            de Waal Malefyt R  
            Liu YJ  
           Human thymic stromal lymphopoietin promotes dendritic cell-mediated CD4+ T cell homeostatic expansion Nat Immunol 2004 5 426 434 14991051 
127 
            Rimoldi M  
            Chieppa M  
            Salucci V  
             
           Intestinal immune homeostasis is regulated by the crosstalk between epithelial cells and dendritic cells Nat Immunol 2005 6 507 514 15821737 
128 
            Zhang K  
            Shan L  
            Rahman MS  
            Unruh H  
            Halayko AJ  
            Gounni AS  
           Constitutive and inducible thymic stromal lymphopoietin expression in human airway smooth muscle cells: role in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2007 293 L375 382 17513456 
129 
            Kato A  
            Favoreto S Jr  
            Avila PC  
            Schleimer RP  
           TLR3- and Th2 cytokine-dependent production of thymic stromal lymphopoietin in human airway epithelial cells J Immunol 2007 179 1080 1087 17617600 
130 
            Soumelis V  
            Reche PA  
            Kanzler H  
             
           Human epithelial cells trigger dendritic cell mediated allergic inflammation by producing TSLP Nat Immunol 2002 3 673 680 12055625 
131 
            Wada T  
            Toma T  
            Hamaguchi Y  
            Yachie A  
           Increased expression of epidermal thymic stromal lymphopoietin in inflammatory peeling skin syndrome J Dermatol 2014 41 448 449 24628284 
132 
            Ying S  
            O’Connor B  
            Ratoff J  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin expression is increased in asthmatic airways and correlates with expression of Th2-attracting chemokines and disease severity J Immunol 2005 174 8183 8190 15944327 
133 
            Noti M  
            Wojno ED  
            Kim BS  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin-elicited basophil responses promote eosinophilic esophagitis Nat Med 2013 19 1005 1013 23872715 
134 
            Yoo J  
            Omori M  
            Gyarmati D  
             
           Spontaneous atopic dermatitis in mice expressing an inducible thymic stromal lymphopoietin transgene specifically in the skin J Exp Med 2005 202 541 549 16103410 
135 
            Demehri S  
            Liu Z  
            Lee J  
             
           Notch-deficient skin induces a lethal systemic B-lymphoproliferative disorder by secreting TSLP, a sentinel for epidermal integrity PLoS Biol 2008 6 e123 18507503 
136 
            Noti M  
            Kim BS  
            Siracusa MC  
             
           Exposure to food allergens through inflamed skin promotes intestinal food allergy through the thymic stromal lymphopoietin-basophil axis J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 133 1390 1399 1399 e1391 1396 24560412 
137 
            Siracusa MC  
            Saenz SA  
            Wojno ED  
             
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin-mediated extramedullary hematopoiesis promotes allergic inflammation Immunity 2013 39 1158 1170 24332033 
138 
            Zhang Z  
            Hener P  
            Frossard N  
            Kato S  
            Metzger D  
            Li M  
            Chambon P  
           Thymic stromal lymphopoietin overproduced by keratinocytes in mouse skin aggravates experimental asthma Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 106 1536 1541 19188585 
139 
            Leyva-Castillo JM  
            Hener P  
            Jiang H  
            Li M  
           TSLP produced by keratinocytes promotes allergen sensitization through skin and thereby triggers atopic march in mice J Invest Dermatol 2013 133 154 163 22832486 
140 
            Tominaga S  
           A putative protein of a growth specific cDNA from BALB/c-3T3 cells is highly similar to the extracellular portion of mouse interleukin 1 receptor FEBS Lett 1989 258 301 304 2532153 
141 
            Schmitz J  
            Owyang A  
            Oldham E  
             
           IL-33, an interleukin-1-like cytokine that signals via the IL-1 receptor-related protein ST2 and induces T helper type 2-associated cytokines Immunity 2005 23 479 490 16286016 
142 
            Xu D  
            Chan WL  
            Leung BP  
             
           Selective expression of a stable cell surface molecule on type 2 but not type 1 helper T cells J Exp Med 1998 187 787 794 9480988 
143 
            Allakhverdi Z  
            Smith DE  
            Comeau MR  
            Delespesse G  
           Cutting edge: The ST2 ligand IL-33 potently activates and drives maturation of human mast cells J Immunol 2007 179 2051 2054 17675461 
144 
            Kondo Y  
            Yoshimoto T  
            Yasuda K  
             
           Administration of IL-33 induces airway hyperresponsiveness and goblet cell hyperplasia in the lungs in the absence of adaptive immune system Int Immunol 2008 20 791 800 18448455 
145 
            Salimi M  
            Barlow JL  
            Saunders SP  
             
           A role for IL-25 and IL-33-driven type-2 innate lymphoid cells in atopic dermatitis J Exp Med 2013 210 2939 2950 24323357 
146 
            Siede J  
            Frohlich A  
            Datsi A  
             
           IL-33 Receptor-Expressing Regulatory T Cells Are Highly Activated, Th2 Biased and Suppress CD4 T Cell Proliferation through IL-10 and TGFbeta Release PLoS One 2016 11 e0161507 27548066 
147 
            Moro K  
            Yamada T  
            Tanabe M  
             
           Innate production of T(H)2 cytokines by adipose tissue-associated c-Kit(+)Sca-1(+) lymphoid cells Nature 2010 463 540 544 20023630 
148 
            Stolarski B  
            Kurowska-Stolarska M  
            Kewin P  
            Xu D  
            Liew FY  
           IL-33 exacerbates eosinophil-mediated airway inflammation J Immunol 2010 185 3472 3480 20693421 
149 
            Chen CY  
            Lee JB  
            Liu B  
             
           Induction of Interleukin-9-Producing Mucosal Mast Cells Promotes Susceptibility to IgE-Mediated Experimental Food Allergy Immunity 2015 43 788 802 26410628 
150 
            Komai-Koma M  
            Brombacher F  
            Pushparaj PN  
             
           Interleukin-33 amplifies IgE synthesis and triggers mast cell degranulation via interleukin-4 in naive mice Allergy 2012 67 1118 1126 22702477 
151 
            Pecaric-Petkovic T  
            Didichenko SA  
            Kaempfer S  
            Spiegl N  
            Dahinden CA  
           Human basophils and eosinophils are the direct target leukocytes of the novel IL-1 family member IL-33 Blood 2009 113 1526 1534 18955562 
152 
            Suzukawa M  
            Iikura M  
            Koketsu R  
             
           An IL-1 cytokine member, IL-33, induces human basophil activation via its ST2 receptor J Immunol 2008 181 5981 5989 18941187 
153 
            Schiering C  
            Krausgruber T  
            Chomka A  
             
           The alarmin IL-33 promotes regulatory T-cell function in the intestine Nature 2014 513 564 568 25043027 
154 
            Alves-Filho JC  
            Sonego F  
            Souto FO  
             
           Interleukin-33 attenuates sepsis by enhancing neutrophil influx to the site of infection Nat Med 2010 16 708 712 20473304 
155 
            Moussion C  
            Ortega N  
            Girard JP  
           The IL-1-like cytokine IL-33 is constitutively expressed in the nucleus of endothelial cells and epithelial cells in vivo: a novel ‘alarmin’? PLoS One 2008 3 e3331 18836528 
156 
            Pichery M  
            Mirey E  
            Mercier P  
            Lefrancais E  
            Dujardin A  
            Ortega N  
            Girard JP  
           Endogenous IL-33 is highly expressed in mouse epithelial barrier tissues, lymphoid organs, brain, embryos, and inflamed tissues: in situ analysis using a novel Il-33-LacZ gene trap reporter strain J Immunol 2012 188 3488 3495 22371395 
157 
            Hardman CS  
            Panova V  
            McKenzie AN  
           IL-33 citrine reporter mice reveal the temporal and spatial expression of IL-33 during allergic lung inflammation Eur J Immunol 2013 43 488 498 23169007 
158 
            Molofsky AB  
            Savage AK  
            Locksley RM  
           Interleukin-33 in Tissue Homeostasis, Injury, and Inflammation Immunity 2015 42 1005 1019 26084021 
159 
            Savinko T  
            Karisola P  
            Lehtimaki S  
             
           ST2 regulates allergic airway inflammation and T-cell polarization in epicutaneously sensitized mice J Invest Dermatol 2013 133 2522 2529 23633023 
160 
            Savinko T  
            Matikainen S  
            Saarialho-Kere U  
             
           IL-33 and ST2 in atopic dermatitis: expression profiles and modulation by triggering factors J Invest Dermatol 2012 132 1392 1400 22277940 
161 
            Kearley J  
            Silver JS  
            Sanden C  
             
           Cigarette smoke silences innate lymphoid cell function and facilitates an exacerbated type I interleukin-33-dependent response to infection Immunity 2015 42 566 579 25786179 
162 
            Barlow JL  
            Peel S  
            Fox J  
             
           IL-33 is more potent than IL-25 in provoking IL-13-producing nuocytes (type 2 innate lymphoid cells) and airway contraction J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013 132 933 941 23810766 
163 
            Yasuda K  
            Muto T  
            Kawagoe T  
             
           Contribution of IL-33-activated type II innate lymphoid cells to pulmonary eosinophilia in intestinal nematode-infected mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 3451 3456 22331917 
164 
            Galand C  
            Leyva-Castillo JM  
            Yoon J  
             
           IL-33 promotes food anaphylaxis in epicutaneously sensitized mice by targeting mast cells J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016 138 1356 1366 27372570 
165 
            Imai Y  
            Yasuda K  
            Sakaguchi Y  
             
           Skin-specific expression of IL-33 activates group 2 innate lymphoid cells and elicits atopic dermatitis-like inflammation in mice Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 110 13921 13926 23918359 
166 
            Fort MM  
            Cheung J  
            Yen D  
             
           IL-25 induces IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 and Th2-associated pathologies in vivo Immunity 2001 15 985 995 11754819 
167 
            Angkasekwinai P  
            Park H  
            Wang YH  
             
           Interleukin 25 promotes the initiation of proallergic type 2 responses J Exp Med 2007 204 1509 1517 17562814 
168 
            Corrigan CJ  
            Wang W  
            Meng Q  
             
           Allergen-induced expression of IL-25 and IL-25 receptor in atopic asthmatic airways and late-phase cutaneous responses J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011 128 116 124 21570719 
169 
            Lee J  
            Ho WH  
            Maruoka M  
             
           IL-17E, a novel proinflammatory ligand for the IL-17 receptor homolog IL-17Rh1 J Biol Chem 2001 276 1660 1664 11058597 
170 
            Rickel EA  
            Siegel LA  
            Yoon BR  
             
           Identification of functional roles for both IL-17RB and IL-17RA in mediating IL-25-induced activities J Immunol 2008 181 4299 4310 18768888 
171 
            Gratchev A  
            Kzhyshkowska J  
            Duperrier K  
            Utikal J  
            Velten FW  
            Goerdt S  
           The receptor for interleukin-17E is induced by Th2 cytokines in antigen-presenting cells Scand J Immunol 2004 60 233 237 15320879 
172 
            Cheung PF  
            Wong CK  
            Ip WK  
            Lam CW  
           IL-25 regulates the expression of adhesion molecules on eosinophils: mechanism of eosinophilia in allergic inflammation Allergy 2006 61 878 885 16792588 
173 
            Tworek D  
            Smith SG  
            Salter BM  
             
           IL-25 Receptor Expression on Airway Dendritic Cells after Allergen Challenge in Subjects with Asthma Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2016 193 957 964 26625138 
174 
            Saenz SA  
            Siracusa MC  
            Perrigoue JG  
             
           IL25 elicits a multipotent progenitor cell population that promotes T(H)2 cytokine responses Nature 2010 464 1362 1366 20200520 
175 
            Neill DR  
            Wong SH  
            Bellosi A  
             
           Nuocytes represent a new innate effector leukocyte that mediates type-2 immunity Nature 2010 464 1367 1370 20200518 
176 
            von Moltke J  
            Ji M  
            Liang HE  
            Locksley RM  
           Tuft-cell-derived IL-25 regulates an intestinal ILC2-epithelial response circuit Nature 2016 529 221 225 26675736 
177 
            Howitt MR  
            Lavoie S  
            Michaud M  
             
           Tuft cells, taste-chemosensory cells, orchestrate parasite type 2 immunity in the gut Science 2016 351 1329 1333 26847546 
178 
            Gerbe F  
            Sidot E  
            Smyth DJ  
             
           Intestinal epithelial tuft cells initiate type 2 mucosal immunity to helminth parasites Nature 2016 529 226 230 26762460 
179 
            Hurst SD  
            Muchamuel T  
            Gorman DM  
             
           New IL-17 family members promote Th1 or Th2 responses in the lung: in vivo function of the novel cytokine IL-25 J Immunol 2002 169 443 453 12077275 
180 
            Kang CM  
            Jang AS  
            Ahn MH  
             
           Interleukin-25 and interleukin-13 production by alveolar macrophages in response to particles Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2005 33 290 296 15961726 
181 
            Tamachi T  
            Maezawa Y  
            Ikeda K  
             
           IL-25 enhances allergic airway inflammation by amplifying a TH2 cell-dependent pathway in mice J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006 118 606 614 16950278 
182 
            Kouzaki H  
            Tojima I  
            Kita H  
            Shimizu T  
           Transcription of interleukin-25 and extracellular release of the protein is regulated by allergen proteases in airway epithelial cells Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2013 49 741 750 23590308 
183 
            Wang YH  
            Angkasekwinai P  
            Lu N  
             
           IL-25 augments type 2 immune responses by enhancing the expansion and functions of TSLP-DC-activated Th2 memory cells J Exp Med 2007 204 1837 1847 17635955 
184 
            Kim BE  
            Bin L  
            Ye YM  
            Ramamoorthy P  
            Leung DY  
           IL-25 enhances HSV-1 replication by inhibiting filaggrin expression, and acts synergistically with Th2 cytokines to enhance HSV-1 replication J Invest Dermatol 2013 133 2678 2685 23657503 
185 
            Hvid M  
            Vestergaard C  
            Kemp K  
            Christensen GB  
            Deleuran B  
            Deleuran M  
           IL-25 in atopic dermatitis: a possible link between inflammation and skin barrier dysfunction? J Invest Dermatol 2011 131 150 157 20861853 
186 
            Lee JB  
            Chen CY  
            Liu B  
             
           IL-25 and CD4(+) TH2 cells enhance type 2 innate lymphoid cell-derived IL-13 production, which promotes IgE-mediated experimental food allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016 137 1216 1225 e1211 1215 26560039 
187 
            Tang W  
            Smith SG  
            Beaudin S  
            Dua B  
            Howie K  
            Gauvreau G  
            O’Byrne PM  
           IL-25 and IL-25 receptor expression on eosinophils from subjects with allergic asthma Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2014 163 5 10 24247484 
188 
            Ballantyne SJ  
            Barlow JL  
            Jolin HE  
             
           Blocking IL-25 prevents airway hyperresponsiveness in allergic asthma J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007 120 1324 1331 17889290 
189 
            Humphreys NE  
            Xu D  
            Hepworth MR  
            Liew FY  
            Grencis RK  
           IL-33, a potent inducer of adaptive immunity to intestinal nematodes J Immunol 2008 180 2443 2449 18250453 
190 
            Vannella KM  
            Ramalingam TR  
            Borthwick LA  
             
           Combinatorial targeting of TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33 in type 2 cytokine-driven inflammation and fibrosis Sci Transl Med 2016 8 337ra365 
191 
            Dewas C  
            Chen X  
            Honda T  
             
           TSLP expression: analysis with a ZsGreen TSLP reporter mouse J Immunol 2015 194 1372 1380 25539812 
192 
            Chu DK  
            Llop-Guevara A  
            Walker TD  
             
           IL-33, but not thymic stromal lymphopoietin or IL-25, is central to mite and peanut allergic sensitization J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013 131 187 200 e181 188 23006545 
193 
            Willart MA  
            Deswarte K  
            Pouliot P  
            Braun H  
            Beyaert R  
            Lambrecht BN  
            Hammad H  
           Interleukin-1alpha controls allergic sensitization to inhaled house dust mite via the epithelial release of GM-CSF and IL-33 J Exp Med 2012 209 1505 1517 22802353 
194 
            Sheih A  
            Parks WC  
            Ziegler SF  
           GM-CSF produced by the airway epithelium is required for sensitization to cockroach allergen Mucosal Immunol 2016 
195 
            Otsuka A  
            Nakajima S  
            Kubo M  
             
           Basophils are required for the induction of Th2 immunity to haptens and peptide antigens Nat Commun 2013 4 1739 
196 
            Larson RP  
            Zimmerli SC  
            Comeau MR  
             
           Dibutyl phthalate-induced thymic stromal lymphopoietin is required for Th2 contact hypersensitivity responses J Immunol 2010 184 2974 2984 20173025 
197 
            Hammad H  
            Plantinga M  
            Deswarte K  
             
           Inflammatory dendritic cells–not basophils–are necessary and sufficient for induction of Th2 immunity to inhaled house dust mite allergen J Exp Med 2010 207 2097 2111 20819925 
198 
            Van Dyken SJ  
            Nussbaum JC  
            Lee J  
             
           A tissue checkpoint regulates type 2 immunity Nat Immunol 2016 17 1381 1387 27749840 
199 
            Simpson EL  
            Chalmers JR  
            Hanifin JM  
             
           Emollient enhancement of the skin barrier from birth offers effective atopic dermatitis prevention J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 134 818 823 25282563 
200 
            Horimukai K  
            Morita K  
            Narita M  
             
           Application of moisturizer to neonates prevents development of atopic dermatitis J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 134 824 830 e826 25282564 
201 
            du Toit G  
            Tsakok T  
            Lack S  
            Lack G  
           Prevention of food allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016 137 998 1010 27059727 
202 
            Iikura Y  
            Naspitz CK  
            Mikawa H  
            Talaricoficho S  
            Baba M  
            Sole D  
            Nishima S  
           Prevention of asthma by ketotifen in infants with atopic dermatitis Ann Allergy 1992 68 233 236 1546818 
203 
            Bustos GJ  
            Bustos D  
            Bustos GJ  
            Romero O  
           Prevention of asthma with ketotifen in preasthmatic children: a three-year follow-up study Clin Exp Allergy 1995 25 568 573 7648464 
204 
            Wahn U  
           Allergic factors associated with the development of asthma and the influence of cetirizine in a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial: first results of ETAC. Early Treatment of the Atopic Child Pediatr Allergy Immunol 1998 9 116 124 9814724 
205 
            Warner JO  
            Child ESGETotA 
           A double-blinded, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of cetirizine in preventing the onset of asthma in children with atopic dermatitis: 18 months’ treatment and 18 months’ posttreatment follow-up J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001 108 929 937 11742270 
206 
            Noon L  
           Prophylactic Inoculation against Hay Fever The Lancet 1911 177 1572 1573 
207 
            Cox L  
            Calderon MA  
           Subcutaneous specific immunotherapy for seasonal allergic rhinitis: a review of treatment practices in the US and Europe Curr Med Res Opin 2010 26 2723 2733 20979432 
208 
            Cox L  
            Nelson H  
            Lockey R  
             
           Allergen immunotherapy: a practice parameter third update J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011 127 S1 55 21122901 
209 
            Nelson HS  
            Lahr J  
            Rule R  
            Bock A  
            Leung D  
           Treatment of anaphylactic sensitivity to peanuts by immunotherapy with injections of aqueous peanut extract J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997 99 744 751 9215240 
210 
            Hussey Freeland DM  
            Fan-Minogue H  
            Spergel JM  
            Chatila TA  
            Nadeau KC  
           Advances in food allergy oral immunotherapy: toward tolerance Curr Opin Immunol 2016 42 119 123 27745972 
211 
            Nadeau KC  
            Kohli A  
            Iyengar S  
            DeKruyff RH  
            Umetsu DT  
           Oral immunotherapy and anti-IgE antibody-adjunctive treatment for food allergy Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2012 32 111 133 22244236 
212 
            Syed A  
            Garcia MA  
            Lyu SC  
             
           Peanut oral immunotherapy results in increased antigen-induced regulatory T-cell function and hypomethylation of forkhead box protein 3 (FOXP3) J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 133 500 510 24636474 
213 
            Akdis CA  
            Akdis M  
           Advances in allergen immunotherapy: aiming for complete tolerance to allergens Sci Transl Med 2015 7 280ps286 
214 
            Begin P  
            Winterroth LC  
            Dominguez T  
             
           Safety and feasibility of oral immunotherapy to multiple allergens for food allergy Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 2014 10 1 24428859 
215 
            Ryan JF  
            Hovde R  
            Glanville J  
             
           Successful immunotherapy induces previously unidentified allergen-specific CD4+ T-cell subsets Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016 113 E1286 1295 26811452 
216 
            Burton OT  
            Logsdon SL  
            Zhou JS  
             
           Oral immunotherapy induces IgG antibodies that act through FcgammaRIIb to suppress IgE-mediated hypersensitivity J Allergy Clin Immunol 2014 134 1310 1317 e1316 25042981 
217 
            Zeiger RS  
           Food allergen avoidance in the prevention of food allergy in infants and children Pediatrics 2003 111 1662 1671 12777607 
218 
            Du Toit G  
            Katz Y  
            Sasieni P  
             
           Early consumption of peanuts in infancy is associated with a low prevalence of peanut allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008 122 984 991 19000582 
219 
            Du Toit G  
            Roberts G  
            Sayre PH  
             
           Randomized trial of peanut consumption in infants at risk for peanut allergy N Engl J Med 2015 372 803 813 25705822 
220 
            Du Toit G  
            Sayre PH  
            Roberts G  
             
           Effect of Avoidance on Peanut Allergy after Early Peanut Consumption N Engl J Med 2016 374 1435 1443 26942922 
221 
            Katz Y  
            Rajuan N  
            Goldberg MR  
            Eisenberg E  
            Heyman E  
            Cohen A  
            Leshno M  
           Early exposure to cow’s milk protein is protective against IgE-mediated cow’s milk protein allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010 126 77 82 e71 20541249 
222 
            Fleischer DM  
            Sicherer S  
            Greenhawt M  
             
           Consensus communication on early peanut introduction and the prevention of peanut allergy in high-risk infants J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015 136 258 261 26100082 
223 
            Perkin MR  
            Logan K  
            Tseng A  
             
           Randomized Trial of Introduction of Allergenic Foods in Breast-Fed Infants N Engl J Med 2016 374 1733 1743 26943128 
224 
            Busse W  
            Corren J  
            Lanier BQ  
             
           Omalizumab, anti-IgE recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody, for the treatment of severe allergic asthma J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001 108 184 190 11496232 
225 
            Casale TB  
            Condemi J  
            LaForce C  
             
           Effect of omalizumab on symptoms of seasonal allergic rhinitis: a randomized controlled trial JAMA 2001 286 2956 2967 11743836 
226 
            Wood RA  
            Kim JS  
            Lindblad R  
             
           A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of omalizumab combined with oral immunotherapy for the treatment of cow’s milk allergy J Allergy Clin Immunol 2016 137 1103 1110 e1101 1111 26581915 
227 
            Schneider LC  
            Rachid R  
            LeBovidge J  
            Blood E  
            Mittal M  
            Umetsu DT  
           A pilot study of omalizumab to facilitate rapid oral desensitization in high-risk peanut-allergic patients J Allergy Clin Immunol 2013 132 1368 1374 24176117 
228 
            Mitchell PD  
            El-Gammal AI  
            O’Byrne PM  
           Emerging monoclonal antibodies as targeted innovative therapeutic approaches to asthma Clin Pharmacol Ther 2016 99 38 48 26502193 
229 
            Gauvreau GM  
            O’Byrne PM  
            Boulet LP  
             
           Effects of an anti-TSLP antibody on allergen-induced asthmatic responses N Engl J Med 2014 370 2102 2110 24846652 
230 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). Anti-TSLP (AMG 157) Plus Antigen-Specific Immunotherapy for Induction of Tolerance in Individuals With Cat Allergy.



