LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10169775046015Nat Hum BehavNat Hum BehavNature human behaviour2397-337428239664532150510.1038/s41562-016-0017EMS71474ArticleCoherency Maximizing Exploration in the Supermarket Riefer Peter S. 12*Prior Rosie 2Blair Nicholas 2Pavey Giles 2Love Bradley C. 311 Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London (UCL), 26 Bedford Way, London WC1H 0AP, UK2 dunnhumby Ltd., 184 Shepherd’s Bush Road, London W6 7NL, UK3 The Alan Turing Institute, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK* Corresponding author. peter@peterriefer.net10 2 2017 9 1 2017 22 2 2017 1 0017This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
   In uncertain environments, effective decision makers balance exploiting options that are currently preferred against exploring alternative options that may prove superior 1,2. For example, a honeybee foraging for nectar must decide whether to continue exploiting the current patch or move to a new location 3–6. When the relative reward of options changes over time, humans explore in a normatively correct fashion, exploring more often when they are uncertain about the relative value of competing options 7–11. However, rewards in these laboratory studies were objective (e.g., monetary payoff), whereas many real-world decision environments involve subjective evaluations of reward (e.g., satisfaction with food choice). In such cases, rather than choices following preferences, preferences may follow choices with subjective reward (i.e., value) to maximize coherency between preferences and behaviour 12,13. If so, increasing coherency would lessen the tendency to explore while uncertainty increases, contrary to previous findings. To evaluate this possibility, we examined the exploratory choices of more than 280,000 anonymized individuals in supermarkets over several years. Consumers’ patterns of exploratory choice ran counter to normative models for objective rewards 7–9,14 – the longer the exploitation streak for a product, the less likely were people to explore an alternative. Furthermore, customers preferred coupons to explore alternative products when they have recently started an exploitation streak. These findings suggest interventions to promote healthy lifestyle choices.

Effective decision making requires balancing exploratory and exploitative behaviour 1,2,15. For example, finding a restaurant that bests one’s current favourite requires some exploration. The timing of exploration is also critical. Normatively, the rate of exploration should increase as uncertainty about the relative goodness of options increases 8. For example, one may give a restaurant a second chance after a year has passed because the service could have improved in the interim. People in laboratory studies with objective rewards (e.g., money) behave in a manner consistent with the ideal actor 7–9,14, exploring more often when uncertainty is high. This efficient, systematic exploration appears to demand capacity-limited cognitive resources 9 and rely on frontal dopamine brain circuitry 14,15. However, as in the restaurant example, rewards can be subjective rather than objective. Although it’s clear that higher monetary rewards are better, comparing the reward associated with two dining experiences is more subjective and multidimensional (e.g., atmosphere, service, food quality). In such cases, determining value becomes an interpretive exercise. This interpretive process can be self-reinforcing such that people come to prefer what they happen to choose (or believe they chose) 16–18. For example, in a jam tasting task, the jam people initially disfavoured was deceptively presented as the favoured option for a re-taste. Not only did people frequently fail to detect the switch, but they also provided rich justifications for their “choice” 12. In such studies, people altered their preferences to align with their previous behaviour, which can affect future choice 17–20. Such coherence seeking behaviour is in line with people’s preference for information that is consistent with their current views and behaviour 21–23.

These coherency seeking tendencies in subjective choice have implications for exploratory behaviour. Most choices, like those in a supermarket, involve subjective interpretation of reward. If people alter their preferences to match their choices, then patterns of exploration should be opposite of that found with objective monetary rewards. With objective rewards, the likelihood of exploring increases the longer it has been since exploring (see Fig. 1a). We refer to this manner of exploration as uncertainty minimizing, as it responds to the possibility of missing changes in the choice environment while exploiting preferred options. If instead preferences conform to choices, then people should become less likely to explore the more they exploit (see Fig. 1b), which we refer to as coherency maximizing. In coherency maximization, the longer people repetitively exploit an option, the more entrenched their preference becomes. Such increased liking for chosen options strengthens coherence between preference and past behaviour, while also promoting coherent future behaviour based on this preference. Unlike common approaches to balancing exploration and exploitation in machine learning 24, both views predict that exploration is structured and non-random in that the likelihood of exploring varies with recent choice history. Although these two views of exploration differ in their predictions for local timing of exploratory choice, they both predict the global exploration frequency should be stable over longer timescales. For example, under coherency maximization, once one eventually explores and discovers a new choice to exploit, the entrenchment process starts anew. In effect, the exploratory choice reduces the burden of continuing to choose coherently to justify past choices, thereby resetting people’s preferences to the level before the entrenchment started. This makes it possible to settle on a new choice once the exploitation streak of a former choice has ended.

Whereas laboratory studies with objective rewards find uncertainty minimizing exploration, we predict that coherency maximizing exploration will dominate with subjective rewards. To test this hypothesis, we evaluated how people explore with subjective rewards by examining shoppers’ behaviour in the supermarket. Tesco, a major UK supermarket chain, provided approximately 283,000 fully anonymized datasets, each representing the purchases of a shopper within a specific product category over a period of 250 weeks, involving 152.2 (SD = 89.9) store visits on average. We examined how individual shoppers explored product options within six different product categories: beers, breads, coffees, toilet papers, washing detergents and yogurts. For example, a shopper may prefer and exploit beer brand A for a number of store visits before exploring brand B. Exploration and exploitation coding was based on repetition – repeated choices (i.e., purchases) were coded as exploitations whereas explorations involved non-repetitive (i.e., switching) choice (see Methods for further details).

On average, people explored with a relative frequency of .404 and this global tendency to explore was stable over time (see Fig. 2a and 2b), mirroring the results in laboratory studies using objective rewards 8,9. Both uncertainty minimization and coherency maximization (see Fig. 1) anticipate this result while also predicting that local patterns of exploration should be non-random. Indeed, people’s patterns of exploratory purchases were non-random, as evidenced by exploitation streaks that were longer (M = 8.56, SD = 18.33) than expected in 92.8% of cases by a permutation test (see Supplementary Information). This result indicates that people systematically explore when shopping. The key question is whether people’s local exploration patterns are more akin to those predicted by uncertainty minimization (Fig. 1a) or coherency maximization (Fig. 1b). As predicted and consistent with coherency maximizing view, shoppers were less likely to explore the longer they had been exploiting a product (see Fig. 2c and 2d). This result is in stark contrast to studies with objective rewards that find uncertainty minimizing exploration.

Model-based analyses, which treat exploitation streak length as a continuous predictor of exploration rate, corroborated the conclusion that people are coherency maximizers. Choices were modelled with logistic regression to predict the probability of exploration given the current exploitation streak length (see Fig. 3a). The results showed that the impact of exploitation streak length on probability to explore was negative for 79.3% of the shopper datasets, implying that people explored less the longer they have been exploiting. A permutation test for all regression slopes revealed that 82.6% were lower than expected (see Fig. 3b). The findings suggest non-random exploration in line with the predictions for subjective outcomes and coherency maximization.

In other domains, exploratory behaviour is viewed as a stable characteristic of individuals and groups. For example, individuals’ strategies tend to agree across internal (e.g., memory retrieval) and external (e.g., foraging) search tasks 25 and exploratory behaviour has been found to systematically vary with factors such as impulsivity, genotype, depressive symptoms, and age 7,9,14,26. Analogously, we consider whether people’s pattern of coherency maximizing exploration is consistent at the individual level across different products. Using the model-based estimates, we found that individuals’ patterns of coherency maximization were consistent across the product categories considered. For example, for 20.3% more shoppers than expected by chance, either all or none of five product category datasets were associated with strong coherency maximizing behaviour (see Supplementary Information), which is remarkable given the diversity of the product categories considered.

One controversial aspect of the coherency maximizing view is that preferences may follow from choices. We assessed this possibility by examining consumer’s choices with coupon offers. First, we analysed how customers reacted toward product coupons, where they received points on a bonus card or price discounts for buying a promoted product. If people’s preferences change with exploitation streak length, they should prefer coupons to exploit or explore products differently at different stages (i.e. lengths) of their exploitation streaks. Based on 69,664 coupon redemptions in our choice datasets (see Fig. 4a), we observed that customers redeemed coupons to explore products more quickly when they were on short exploitation streaks (M = 27.0 days) compared to long ones (M = 29.8 days). Conversely, customers redeemed coupons to exploit more quickly on long exploitation streaks (M = 24.4 days) and slower on short streaks (M = 25.7 days). This strong interaction is predicted by the coherency maximization view.

Second, rather than relying on existing data, we conducted a follow-up coupon study in which we issued coupons for instant coffee to 8,623 randomly selected households who regularly buy instant coffees. A logistic regression model was fit to the group to predict coupon redemption probability based on exploitation streak length. Consistent with the previous coupon analysis and coherency maximizing exploration, the results revealed a significant interaction of coupon type (i.e. whether the coupon meant exploration or exploitation to the customer) and current exploitation streak length, |z| = 3.623, p &lt; .001 (see Fig. 4b, details in Supplementary Information). Hence, we find support for the idea that people’s choices induced preference changes, as their interest in coupon rewards depended on how well the coupon matched their recent choices (i.e. their exploitation streak length).

The overall pattern of results strongly indicates that shoppers are coherency maximizing explorers, which is striking given that research with objective rewards (e.g., money) finds the opposite, uncertainty minimizing exploration 7–11,14. One explanation is that subjective rewards involve an evaluative process (e.g., satisfaction with food choice) in which the individual constructs value to justify the choice and maximize coherency 18,27. Indeed, our ability to a priori predict who would redeem a coupon relied on people's preferences being shaped by recent behaviours. Effectively, preferences may follow choices, which might appear irrational 28 but could be an effective strategy in some environments. For example, preferring food sources that have been frequently and recently sampled could be an effective means for avoiding foodborne illnesses. The same approach we utilized, linking big data with psychological theory, could be leveraged to properly time interventions aimed at improving diet and exercise regime. Given that we found individuals' patterns of exploration were consistent across diverse product categories, it may be possible to predict who would benefit most from such interventions. One basic lesson from our research is that people periodically enter periods of exploration with a predictable likelihood, creating a window of opportunity to modify behaviour for better or worse.

Method
We analysed 282,972 anonymous datasets containing the chronologically ordered purchases of individual supermarket customers at Tesco, a UK supermarket chain, regarding one of six different product categories. Tesco provided access to these datasets in collaboration with dunnhumby, a customer science company and subsidiary of Tesco (see Data Availability statement for requests). Customers’ product choices were recorded in a database every time they checked out using a personalized bonus card. This data use was in accord with the card agreement, which stipulated that anonymized shopping data would be used and shared outside of Tesco. Individuals in this database can only be identified by an anonymous dataset number, but not by any personal information. Thus, the analysed datasets only contained purchase-related information (e.g. quantities, prices, discounts, etc.), but no personal information about the shopper. Our sample was restricted to people with at least 50 purchases within a specific product category, which was necessary to model individual behaviour and to select from loyal customers (i.e., for which we have good coverage of their purchases). We did not select customers who never explored or who did over 75% of the time. We coded exploration and exploitation based on repetition, where repeated choices were coded as exploitations and non-repetitions as explorations (see Fig. 3a).

Data Availability
The datasets generated and analysed for the present study are available from dunnhumby, a customer science company and subsidiary of Tesco, upon request: data_questions@dunnhumby.com.

Further information about the data and analyses is available online at the Open Science Framework: osf.io/e76wy.

Supplementary Information
Supplementary Information  Acknowledgements
We thank Peter Todd for his helpful comments.

This work was supported by the Leverhulme Trust grant RPG-2014-075, NIH (Grant 1P01HD080679), and Wellcome Trust Senior Investigator Award WT106931MA to B.L. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.


          Author Contributions
        

P.R. was involved in all parts of this project, supported by R.P., N.B. and G.P. regarding the data analysis and with input from B.L. for the design, analysis and write-up of the article.


          Competing Interests statement
        

The authors declare no competing interests.

Figure 1 Predicted exploration patterns for uncertainty minimization and coherency maximization.
a, In changing environments, uncertainty minimizing decision makers tend to explore more as the time since the last exploration increases. This normatively correct pattern of non-random exploratory behaviour, where people explore more as uncertainty about the relative goodness of competing options increases, has been found in humans with objective rewards (e.g. monetary values).

b, In contrast, coherency maximizing decision makers tend to explore less as the interval since the last exploration increases. One possibility is that when outcomes require subjective interpretation (e.g. tasting food), decision makers change their preferences to match their recent choices in order to increase coherency. We predict that this self-reinforcing pattern will hold for supermarket shoppers.

Figure 2 Exploration changes locally but not globally.
a, A median split of each shopper’s purchases revealed that the overall rate of exploration was stable over time.

b, Likewise, the distribution of differences between the first and second half exploration rates for each shopper showed no systematic variations over time.

c, A median split of exploitation streaks by shopper revealed that, in line with the predictions for coherency maximization, people were overall less likely to explore on their next purchase when currently on a long run of exploitative choices.

d, In line with panel c, most individuals showed a decline in probability to explore from exploitation streaks shorter to those longer than their median streak.

Figure 3 Predicting exploration from exploitation streak lengths.
a, As shown, a coherency maximizing shopper is less likely to explore alternatives the longer the exploitation streak, which is characterized by a negative slope in the logistic regression model. In contrast, the slope would be positive under uncertainty minimization and flat for random exploration.

b, Consistent with coherency maximization, the slope of the fitted logistic regression model was negative for the majority of individuals. For comparison, we permuted the order of each individual’s purchases and fitted the model (see Supplementary Information). Slopes were more negative in the actual than in the permuted data, providing further support that people are coherency maximizing.

Figure 4 Coupon redemption depending on current exploitation streak length.
a, Consistent with coherency maximization, customers redeemed coupons to exploit products more quickly the longer they have been exploiting the product (i.e. on long exploitation streaks). Coupons to explore alternatives were used more quickly when customers were only beginning to exploit (i.e. on short exploitation streaks). Error bars represent standard errors.

b, Model fits of the observed relationship between exploitation streak length and the probability of coupon redemption are shown. A shopper was more likely to redeem a coupon to exploit the longer the exploitation streak, whereas a coupon to explore was more likely to be redeemed the more recently a shopper has explored.


   1 
            Cohen JD  
            McClure SM  
            Angela JY  
           Should I stay or should I go? How the human brain manages the trade-off between exploitation and exploration Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 2007 362 933 942 17395573 
2 
            Hills TT  
             
           Exploration versus exploitation in space, mind, and society Trends in cognitive sciences 2015 19 46 54 25487706 
3 
            Hutchinson JM  
            Wilke A  
            Todd PM  
           Patch leaving in humans: can a generalist adapt its rules to dispersal of items across patches? Animal Behaviour 2008 75 1331 1349 
4 
            Kramer DL  
            Weary DM  
           Exploration versus exploitation: a field study of time allocation to environmental tracking by foraging chipmunks Animal Behaviour 1991 41 443 449 
5 
            Krebs JR  
            Kacelnik A  
            Taylor P  
           Test of optimal sampling by foraging great tits Nature 1978 275 27 31 
6 
            Mobbs D  
             
           Foraging under competition: the neural basis of input-matching in humans The Journal of Neuroscience 2013 33 9866 9872 23739983 
7 
            Blanco NJ  
            Otto AR  
            Maddox WT  
            Beevers CG  
            Love BC  
           The influence of depression symptoms on exploratory decision-making Cognition 2013 129 563 568 24055832 
8 
            Knox WB  
            Otto AR  
            Stone P  
            Love B  
           The Nature of Belief-Directed Exploratory Choice in Human Decision-Making Frontiers in Psychology 2012 2 398 22319503 
9 
            Otto AR  
            Knox WB  
            Markman AB  
            Love BC  
           Physiological and behavioral signatures of reflective exploratory choice Cognitive, Affective, &amp; Behavioral Neuroscience 2014 14 1167 1183 
10 
            Riefer PS  
            Love BC  
           Unfazed by Both the Bull and Bear: Strategic Exploration in Dynamic Environments Games 2015 6 251 261 
11 
            Speekenbrink M  
            Konstantinidis E  
           Uncertainty and exploration in a restless bandit problem Topics in cognitive science 2015 7 351 367 25899069 
12 
            Hall L  
            Johansson P  
            Tärning B  
            Sikström S  
            Deutgen T  
           Magic at the marketplace: Choice blindness for the taste of jam and the smell of tea Cognition 2010 117 54 61 20637455 
13 
            Johansson P  
            Hall L  
            Chater N  
           Neuroscience of preference and choice: Cognitive and neural mechanisms 
            Dolan Raymond J  
            Sharot Tali  
           Academic Press 2012 121 138 
14 
            Blanco NJ  
             
           A frontal dopamine system for reflective exploratory behavior Neurobiology of learning and memory 2015 123 84 91 26004676 
15 
            Daw ND  
            O'Doherty JP  
            Dayan P  
            Seymour B  
            Dolan RJ  
           Cortical substrates for exploratory decisions in humans Nature 2006 441 876 879 16778890 
16 
            Egan LC  
            Bloom P  
            Santos LR  
           Choice-induced preferences in the absence of choice: Evidence from a blind two choice paradigm with young children and capuchin monkeys Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 2010 46 204 207 
17 
            Sharot T  
            Fleming SM  
            Yu X  
            Koster R  
            Dolan RJ  
           Is choice-induced preference change long lasting? Psychological science 2012 23 1123 1129 22933456 
18 
            Sharot T  
            Velasquez CM  
            Dolan RJ  
           Do decisions shape preference? Evidence from blind choice Psychological science 2010 21 1231 1235 20679522 
19 
            Hall L  
            Johansson P  
            Strandberg T  
           Lifting the veil of morality: Choice blindness and attitude reversals on a self-transforming survey PloS one 2012 7 e45457 23029020 
20 
            Johansson P  
            Hall L  
            Sikström S  
            Olsson A  
           Failure to detect mismatches between intention and outcome in a simple decision task Science 2005 310 116 119 16210542 
21 
            Festinger L  
           A theory of cognitive dissonance Stanford University Press 1957 
22 
            Frey D  
           Recent research on selective exposure to information Advances in experimental social psychology 1986 19 41 80 
23 
            Jonas E  
            Schulz-Hardt S  
            Frey D  
            Thelen N  
           Confirmation bias in sequential information search after preliminary decisions: an expansion of dissonance theoretical research on selective exposure to information Journal of personality and social psychology 2001 80 557 11316221 
24 
            Sutton RS  
            Barto AG  
           Reinforcement learning: An introduction MIT press 1998 
25 
            Hills TT  
            Todd PM  
            Goldstone RL  
           Search in external and internal spaces evidence for generalized cognitive search processes Psychological Science 2008 19 802 808 18816288 
26 
            Frank MJ  
            Doll BB  
            Oas-Terpstra J  
            Moreno F  
           Prefrontal and striatal dopaminergic genes predict individual differences in exploration and exploitation Nature neuroscience 2009 12 1062 1068 19620978 
27 
            Johansson P  
            Hall L  
            Tärning B  
            Sikström S  
            Chater N  
           Choice blindness and preference change: You will like this paper better if you (believe you) chose to read it! Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 2014 27 281 289 
28 
            Ariely D  
            Norton MI  
           How actions create–not just reveal–preferences Trends in cognitive sciences 2008 12 13 16 18063405 

