LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   87037373646Epidemiol InfectEpidemiol. Infect.Epidemiology and infection0950-26881469-440928065212535904610.1017/S0950268816003198NIHMS850976ArticleHospital-acquired listeriosis linked to a persistently contaminated milkshake machine Mazengia E. 1*Kawakami V. 23*Rietberg K. 2Kay M. 2Wyman P. 1Skilton C. 1Aberra A. 4Boonyaratanakornkit J. 4Limaye A. P. 4Pergam S. A. 45Whimbey E. 4Olsen R. 4Duchin J. S. 241 Food Protection Program of Environmental Health Division, Public Health — Seattle &amp; King County, Seattle, USA2 Communicable Disease Epidemiology and Immunization Section, Public Health — Seattle &amp; King County, Seattle, USA3 Epidemic Intelligence Service, Division of Scientific Education and Professional Development, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, USA4 University of Washington, Seattle, USA5 Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, USA* Authors for correspondence: Dr. V. Kawakami, 401 5th Ave Suite 1200, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA. (vance.kawakami@kingcounty.gov), (eyob.mazengia@kingcounty.gov)15 2 2017 09 1 2017 4 2017 01 4 2017 145 5 857 863 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.SUMMARY
One case of hospital-acquired listeriosis linked to milkshakes produced in a commercial-grade shake freezer machine that remained contaminated following a previous outbreak of listeriosis associated with a pasteurized, dairy-based ice cream product at the same hospital despite repeated cleaning and sanitation. Healthcare facilities should be aware of the potential for prolonged Listeria contamination of food service equipment. In addition, healthcare providers should consider counseling persons who have an increased risk for Listeria infections regarding foods that have caused Listeria infections. The prevalence of persistent Listeria contamination of commercial-grade milkshake machines in healthcare facilities and the risk associated with serving dairy-based ice cream products to hospitalized patients at increased risk for invasive L. monocytogenes infections should be further evaluated.


   Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne bacterial pathogen known to cause invasive infections disproportionally among immunocompromised persons, adults 65 years and older, and newborns; it can also result in spontaneous abortions, stillbirth, and fetal death in pregnant women [1–3]. Annually in the United States, Listeria infections cause an estimated 1,460 hospitalizations and 260 deaths [2].

Milkshakes are a high-protein, caloric-dense, pasteurized dairy-based ice cream product served to hospital patients regularly and are also widely available in the community. Neither the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) or the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommendations for populations with high risk for invasive listeriosis mention pasteurized ice cream products as foods that should be avoided [3–5]. This recommendation is despite pasteurized dairy-based ice cream products being implicated in two recent Listeria outbreaks in the United States. [6–7].

Shake freezers are commercial-grade machines that hold dairy-based ice cream mix at a safe holding temperature (below 5 °C) while allowing quick preparation of a variety of frozen beverages including milkshakes. The main components of shake freezers are a holding mix tank, mix feed system, freezing cylinder, beater, and dispensing nozzle. The refrigerated holding mix tank (hopper) holds and refrigerates the liquid ice cream mix product until it is ready to be injected into the freezing cylinder through the mix feed system. Once in the freezing cylinder, the ice cream mix freezes to the walls of the cylinder and the beater scrapes the mix off the cylinder walls until it achieves the proper consistency for the product to be served through the dispensing nozzle.

On 25 November 2015, Washington State Department of Health (WA DOH) notified Public Health – Seattle &amp; King County (PHSKC) of a hospitalized patient with an L. monocytogenes blood culture isolate that had a rare pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern closely related with two hospital-acquired L. monocytogenes infected patients that were hospitalized at the same King County, Washington State hospital (hospital A) 1 year earlier. A PHSKC investigation of the initial 2014 outbreak determined that a locally produced, commercial pasteurized ice cream mix, was the source of the L. monocytogenes outbreak [7]. The 2014 outbreak resulted in the recall of all products produced by the ice cream manufacturer, temporary closure of the manufacturer, and suspension of shake freezer machine use at the hospital [7]. Hospital A had two commercial-grade shake freezer machines of the same model that was used to produce milkshakes; one was in the hospital cafeteria (machine A) and the other was used exclusively for hospitalized patients (machine B). Hospital A shake freezers had 2 separate 18.9 L refrigerated mix hoppers and 6.6 L freezing cylinders which were used to serve both vanilla and chocolate milkshakes.

To prevent future L. monocytogenes infections, hospital personnel were instructed to disassemble, thoroughly clean and sanitize all contact surfaces of both machines as outlined in the manufacturer operating manual [8]. In brief, hospital A personnel emptied the machines of all ice cream product, flushed with water and a manufacturer approved, powdered chlorinated detergent sanitizer solution. The machines were disassembled to brush clean, sanitize and air dry the internal components coming into direct contact with ice cream mix product before reassembling. The cleaning and sanitizing process took hospital A personnel &gt;2 hours for each machine. On 30 December 2014, hospital A personnel cleaned and sanitized both machines and collected environmental samples for L. monocytogenes testing at a private food laboratory (Lab A) using two methods; sponge swabs and water rinse samples. Sponge swabs were collected from the hopper and exterior surfaces of the dispensing nozzles while water rinse samples consisted of sterile water rinsed through the machine and collected from the dispensing nozzle. A total of 8 samples were collected (2 rinse and 2 swab samples for each machine); both rinse samples from machine B were positive for L. monocytogenes. Subsequently, hospital A personnel repeated cleaning and sanitation of both machines several times; on 5 January 2015, repeat testing using the same environmental sample collection methods resulted in both machines testing negative for L. monocytogenes (Fig. 1). Hospital A resumed operation of both machines using ice cream mix product from a different source and increased machine cleaning and sanitizing from weekly to twice weekly. In addition, hospital A implemented a policy of not using leftover milkshake product after completion of a 3-month cleaning cycle that entailed cleaning and replacing all replaceable moving parts of the machines.

The two patients in the 2014 L. monocytogenes outbreak were non-Hispanic men in their fifties who were hospitalized at hospital A. Patient 1, was admitted to hospital A on 2 November 2014, underwent heart transplantation on 3 November 2014 and developed fever and chills on 18 November 2014 with subsequent blood cultures positive for L. monocytogenes [7]. Patient 2 was admitted to hospital A on 27 October 2014, for a gastrointestinal bleed complicated by enterococcal bacteremia; within 24 hours of discharge on 4 December 2014, he developed fever, fatigue, headache and confusion with subsequent blood cultures positive for L. monocytogenes [7]. Both patient interviews with the CDC’s standardized Listeria Initiative questionnaire and detailed hospital dietary records indicated that while hospitalized, patient 1 ordered milkshakes 2 – 4 times per week and patient 2 ordered two milkshakes per day all produced in machine B [7, 9].

Patient 3 is a woman in her forties admitted to hospital A on 20 August 2015 who subsequently underwent a heart transplant on 11 September 2015. Two separate sets of blood cultures obtained after she became febrile on hospitalization day 85 (15 November 2015) tested positive for L. monocytogenes. Patient 3 received intravenous ampicillin and recovered without complications.

L. monocytogenes is an uncommon recipient-derived pathogen in solid organ transplant patients [10]. However, the United Network for Organ Sharing confirmed to hospital A that other solid organ recipients who shared the same donor as patient 3 did not have clinical or laboratory evidence of an L. monocytogenes infection.

Patient 3 was interviewed with the CDC’s standardized Listeria Initiative questionnaire and her detailed hospital dietary records were reviewed [9]. Based on Patient 3’s interview and dietary records, Patient 3 ordered seventy-one 236 ml milkshakes served from hospital A’s machine B (range 0–3 servings/day) during her exposure period, defined as the 70 days before symptom onset.

On 19 November 2015, hospital A collected 15 samples from machine B for Listeria testing at Lab A. The sampling method was similar to previous methods used by hospital A; cleaning and sanitizing the machine prior to collecting 8 sponge swab samples (hoppers and exterior surfaces of the dispensing nozzles) and 7 rinse samples (sterile water was placed in the hopper and passed through the system and collected upon exit from the dispensing nozzles). On 23 November 2015, all 15 samples tested negative for Listeria species, and hospital A resumed use of machine B to serve patient milkshakes.

On 25 November 2015, the clinical isolate for patient 3 yielded an indistinguishable PFGE pattern (pattern A) from the 2014 outbreak patient 1 and was closely related with 2014 outbreak patient 3, differing by two bands (pattern B). PHSKC instructed hospital A to stop serving milkshakes from both shake freezer machines.

Sampling for L. monocytogenes was conducted by PHSKC during an environmental inspection of hospital A kitchen on 25 November 2015; Eighteen samples were collected from machine B which included dispensed milkshake product, ice cream mix scooped directly from the hopper, and sponge swabs of the freezer cylinder, an internal component that required some disassembly to access (Table 1). At the time of sample collection, machine A was not in use so only 8 sponge swab samples were collected. In addition, 2 unopened ice cream mix 1.89 L cartons from different lots obtained from hospital A walk-in coolers were submitted for Listeria testing. On 4 December 2015, PHSKC collected an additional 9 unopened ice cream mix 1.89 L cartons from different lots (total of 11 lots) and 28 additional sponge swab samples of surfaces throughout the hospital kitchen to assess the potential for persistent environmental Listeria contamination of other food service areas.

Testing of food and environmental samples was performed at the same private food laboratory (Lab A) previously used by hospital A. Samples were enriched in a proprietary liquid culture medium (IEH M1 Medium with Gram-positive additive and nalidixic acid) for 24h at 35°C. Enriched samples were initially analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR); Listeria spp. samples that were “Initial Reactive” after completion of the primary PCR were concentrated using a Listeria specific immunomagnetic separation procedure followed by a secondary PCR for Listeria. Samples that were presumptive positive after the secondary PCR were confirmed using culture procedures as described in the FDA Bacteriological Analytical Manual [11]. Confirmatory testing of clinical isolates from patients was performed at WA DOH Public Health Laboratories (PHL) utilizing traditional culture-based and biochemical identification methods for L. monocytogenes confirmation. Two-enzyme (AscI and ApaI) PFGE analysis was performed at Lab A and WA DOH PHL using methods previously described [12–13].

Six of 20 sponge swab machine samples and 3 of 6 dispensed milkshake products tested positive for L. monocytogenes. All positive samples which were indistinguishable by PFGE pattern (pattern A) from patient 1 and 3 clinical isolates were from machine B. A retrospective review of national CDC PulseNet PFGE database indicated pattern A was only previously detected in the 2014 L. monocytogenes outbreak at hospital A. Machine A environmental samples for L. monocytogenes were negative. Similarly, unopened milkshake dairy mix product samples and hospital A cafeteria surfaces were negative for L. monocytogenes.

PHSKC investigated 1 case of hospital-acquired listeriosis in which the epidemiological and laboratory evidence indicated that the source of infection was a commercial-grade freezer shake machine persistently contaminated with L. monocytogenes for at least 1 year, despite twice weekly cleaning and sanitizing. The contamination of this equipment went undetected despite two rounds of environmental sampling. Reintroduction of the rare 2014 L. monocytogenes outbreak strain to hospital A is unlikely because follow-up environmental cultures of the food preparation and cleaning areas after patient 3’s L. monocytogenes exposure period were negative. In addition, the hospital had changed its source of ice cream product mix before identification of patient 3’s L. monocytogenes exposure period and eleven unopened cartons from different lots of the new ice cream product mix tested negative for L. monocytogenes. This outbreak underscores the challenges of cleaning and sanitizing inaccessible food contact surfaces, and the opportunity for L. monocytogenes to persist in food service equipment and cause human infections for extended periods.

L. monocytogenes has been known to persist in food processing plants for years, particularly on equipment surfaces that cannot be reached by sanitizers (i.e., niches), which contributes to the foodborne transmission of L. monocytogenes [14–15]. Further, L. monocytogenes is well adapted to cold temperatures, growing and surviving at refrigeration temperatures ranging from −0.5 to 9.3°C [16]. L. monocytogenes is also known to rapidly attach to different surfaces used in food processing and facilities, forming either strong cell adsorption or biofilm [14]. Although L. monocytogenes’ ability to survive in different conditions contributes to its persistence, current knowledge indicates that niches are the main factor that allow L. monocytogenes to persist in the environment [14].

Hospital food service operations should have a L. monocytogenes control plan that addresses kitchen equipment design, adherence to approved cleaning and sanitation schedules, and ongoing stringent sampling of suspect products and equipment [15, 17]. Numerous commercial milkshake machines exist on the market. Certain models use self-contained mix products in disposable bags where food products do not come in contact with reusable parts; others, including those used by hospital A, have reservoirs, pipes, and mixers that make contact with mix products. Listeria’s ability to form strong attachments to food contact surfaces, along with the high fat content of the dairy-based ice cream mix, might create an ideal environment for L. monocytogenes to resist cleaning, thereby contributing to its persistence in both accessible and inaccessible machine parts. The operating manual for the machines used by hospital A recommends cleaning and sanitizing these machines daily, although hospital A reports that the equipment representative recommended weekly cleaning. Hospital A chose to clean and sanitize twice weekly, which took &gt; two hours/machine. Because of associated cleaning challenges, hospital A permanently discontinued machine use during the investigation of patient 3’s listeriosis. To minimize risk of bacterium persistence during operational periods, adherence to manufacturer cleaning and sanitizing recommendations should be practiced. However, for both commercial and healthcare facilities, it is unknown to what extent operators conform to these guidelines. To minimize risk of introduction of L. monocytogenes in the machine, facilities serving patients at high risk for listeriosis should also consider restricting use of equipment that permits direct contact of food product and machine surfaces.

During the study period, three sets of environmental sponge swab samples from both machines that had been fully cleaned and sanitized tested negative for L. monocytogenes, but multiple sponge swab samples of one machine’s surfaces with milkshake product still inside tested positive. Testing after cleaning and sanitizing minimizes the likelihood of recovering the bacterium; sampling plans should consider testing equipment before cleaning and during use to maximize the likelihood of recovering Listeria species and other pathogens. Further, robust sampling techniques, (e.g., sponge swab sampling of hard-to-clean environmental niches), should be considered.

Our investigation is subject to two limitations. Although unlikely, we did not investigate if the producer of the ice cream mix served to patient 3 had used any of the same manufacturer facilities, equipment, or ingredients as the ice cream mix producer implicated in the 2014 L. monocytogenes outbreak. The second limitation is because the Listeria testing of the environmental samples was qualitative (presence-absence) and not quantitative, we were unable to determine the extent of L. monocytogenes contamination in different components of the machines.

Healthcare facilities re-evaluation of their current restricted food polices to include elimination of dairy-based ice cream products for immunocompromised, hospitalized patients could help prevent hospital-acquired foodborne Listeria infections. A discussion of restricted food policy should include investigating alternate milkshake products that have minimal storage and preparation requirements which could minimize post-pasteurization Listeria contamination. The prevalence of persistent Listeria contamination of shake freezer in healthcare facilities and the risk associated with serving pasteurized dairy-based milkshakes to hospitalized patients at increased risk for invasive L. monocytogenes infections should be further evaluated.

The authors thank Jennifer Lloyd of the Communicable Disease Epidemiology and Immunization Section, Public Health – Seattle &amp; King County for her investigative work and manuscript review. We also thank Beth Melius of Washington State Department of Health for her expertise and investigative work. Additionally, we thank Roxanne Meek, Ailyn Perez-Osorio, Kaye Eckmann at Washington State Department of Health Public Health Laboratories and Mansour Samadpour and Kristina Tenney at IEH Laboratories and Consulting Group for laboratory testing and analysis expertise. Finally, we thank Steven Stroika at CDC PulseNet for his L. monocytogenes PFGE expertise.

Disclaimers: None


          DECLARATION OF INTEREST
        

None

Fig. 1 Timeline of epidemiological, environmental and laboratory investigation of a hospital-acquired listeriosis linked to milkshakes produced in a persistently contaminated shake freezer machine


 Machine A and B at hospital A


 Patient 3 milkshake consumption at hospital A


 Patient 3 hospitalization at hospital A

Table 1 Sampling for Listeria monocytogenes at hospital A, November to December, 2015.

Collection date	Sample location	Machine	# of samples	Collection methoda	L. monocytogenes culture results	
25 Nov 2015	Dispensed Mix	B	6	Dispensed into Whirlpak	Positive (n=3)	
25 Nov 2015	Mix tank (Hopper)	B	2	Ice cream mix scooped from reservoir	Positive (n=1)	
25 Nov 2015	Mix tank (Hopper)	B	4	Sponge swab of side walls	Positive (n=2)	
25 Nov 2015	Freezer cylinder	B	6	Sponge swab of nozzle pieces	Positive (n=3)	
25 Nov 2015	Mix tank (Hopper)	A	2	Sponge swab of side walls	Negative	
25 Nov 2015	Freezer cylinder	A	6	Sponge swab of nozzle pieces	Negative	
25 Nov 2015	Liquid ice cream mix	N/A	2b	Unopened 1.89 L cartons	Negative	
04 Dec 2015	Liquid ice cream mix	N/A	9b	Unopened 1.89 L cartons	Negative	
04 Dec 2015	Kitchen surfacesc	N/A	25	Sponge swabs of various kitchen surfaces	Negative	
a All samples were collected by PHSKC Food Protection Program personnel.

b Unopened ice cream mix cartons were from different lots (n=11) collected from hospital A walk-in cooler.

c Hospital A kitchen surfaces sampled included doorknobs, drawer shelves, food preparation tables, room service carts, sinks, floors, and floor drains.


   1 
            Swaminathan B  
            Rocourt J  
            Bille J  
           Manual of Clinical Microbiology New York City ASM Press 1995 341 348 
2 
            Scallan E  
             
           Foodborne illness acquired in the United States—major pathogens Emerging Infectious Disease 2011 17 7 12 
3 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Vital Signs: Listeria  Illnesses, Deaths, and Outbreaks — United States, 2009–2011 MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2013 62 22 448 452 23739339 
4 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Listeria  (Listeriosis) Prevention (https://www.cdc.gov/listeria/prevention.html ) Accessed 29 July 2016 
5 United States Food and Drug Administration Keep Listeria out of your kitchen (http://www.fda.gov/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm274114.htm ) Accessed 29 July 2016 
6 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Multistate Outbreak of Listeriosis Linked to Blue Bell Creameries Products (Final Update) (http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/ice-cream-03-15/ ) Accessed 24 September 2016 
7 
            Rietberg K  
             
           Outbreak of Listeria monocytogenes  infections linked to a pasteurized ice cream product served to hospitalized patients Epidemiology &amp; Infection 2015 1 1 4 
8 Taylor United Technologies Model 441 &amp; 444 Shake Freezers Operator’s Manual 
            http://www.taylor-company.es/assets/pdfs/downloadables/0441_444op0.pdf 
           Accessed 04 October 2016 
9 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC Listeria  Initiative Case Report Form (http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/pdf/listeria-case-report-form-omb-0920-0004.pdf ) Accessed 24 September 2016 
10 
            Fishman JA  
           Infection in solid-organ transplant recipients New England Journal of Medicine 2007 357 2601 2614 18094380 
11 
            Hitchens AD  
            Jinneman K  
            Chen Y  
           Bacteriological Analytical Manual Chapter10 Detection and Enumeration of Listeria monocytogenes  in Foods 
            http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodScienceResearch/LaboratoryMethods/ucm071400.htm 
           Accessed 06 October 2016 
12 
            Tenover FC  
             
           Interpreting chromosomal DNA restriction patterns produced by pulse-field gel electrophoresis: criteria for bacterial strain typing Journal of Clinical Microbiology 1995 33 2432 2433 
13 
            Goering RV  
            Tenover FC  
           Letter to the Editor Journal of Clinical Microbiology 1997 35 2432 2433 9276435 
14 
            Ferreira V  
             
           Listeria monocytogenes  persistence in food-associated environments: epidemiology, strain characteristics, and implications for public health Journal of Food Protection 2014 77 150 170 24406014 
15 
            Miettinen M  
            Bjorkroth K  
            Korkeala H  
           Characterization of Listeria monocytogenes  from an ice cream plant by serotyping and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis International Journal of Food Microbiology 1999 43 187 192 
16 
            Walker SJ  
            Archer P  
            Banks JG  
           Growth of Listeria monocytogenes  at refrigeration temperatures Journal of Applied Bacteriology 1990 68 157 162 2108109 
17 
            Lahou E  
             
           Evaluation of the food safety management system in a hospital food service operation toward Listeria monocytogenes  Food Control 2015 49 75 84 

