LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   04026405059J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo)J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol.Journal of nutritional science and vitaminology0301-48001881-774226598834571084010.3177/jnsv.61.S15NIHMS922798ArticleEnvironmental Interventions for Obesity and Chronic Disease Prevention Gittelsohn Joel Trude Angela Global Obesity Prevention Center, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 North Wolfe St, Baltimore, MD, 21205–2179, USA28 11 2017 2015 01 12 2017 61 Suppl S15 S16 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Summary
Innovative approaches are needed to impact obesity and other diet-related chronic diseases, including tested interventions at the environmental and policy levels. We have conducted multi-level community trials in low-income minority settings in the United States and other countries that test interventions to improve the food environment, support policy, and reduce the risk for developing obesity and other diet-related chronic diseases. All studies have examined change from pre- to post-study, comparing an intervention with a comparison group. Our results have shown consistent positive effects of these trials on consumer psychosocial factors, food purchasing, food preparation and diet, and, in some instances, obesity. We have recently implemented a systems science model to support programs and policies to improve urban food environments. Environmental interventions are a promising approach for addressing the global obesity epidemic due to their wide reach. Further work is needed to disseminate, expand and sustain these initiatives through policy at the city, state and federal levels.

environmental interventionsobesitychronic diseasepolicy
   The worldwide obesity epidemic is a multilevel and complex public health issue. Innovative multi-component approaches are needed to impact this problem, including tested interventions at the environmental and policy levels. Populations living in poor food environments are at greater risk of inadequate diets, and of developing diet-related chronic disease. Thus, nutrition interventions to address the obesity epidemic need to focus at multiple levels, including the individual, family, community food environment and policy levels.

Materials and Methods
Since 2001, we have conducted 10 trials in low-income minority populations in the United States and in other countries to test interventions to improve the food environment and reduce risk for developing obesity and other diet-related chronic diseases. These trials have centered on changing the retail food environment (supermarkets and small stores), prepared food sources (carry-outs), wholesalers/distributors, schools, work-sites, churches, recreation centers, community and social media, and more recently have taken policy-level approaches. These community-based interventions were developed through formative research and a community engagement process (community workshops) in which community members and other key stakeholders contributed ideas and strategies to plan and implement the program. Efforts have centered on increasing access to healthier foods (availability and pricing), and promoting these foods through point-of-purchase materials (shelf labels and posters), interactive sections (taste-testing healthier foods and flyers) and promotional giveaways. The work has been conducted in rural regions targeting American Indians, First Nations, and Pacific Islanders— and in urban regions focusing on African American, Pacific Islander and Hispanic communities. All studies have examined change from pre- to post-intervention, comparing a treatment group with a comparison group to assess the impact of the program. All trials have been multi-level, seeking to change individual and family behavior, and access to food choices and information at the community institution level.

Results and Findings
Process evaluation reveals that these multi-level community trials were implemented with moderate to high reach, dose and fidelity at all intervention levels (1). We have found consistent positive effects of these multiple intervention trials on consumer psychosocial factors (knowledge and intentions), on healthy food purchasing and preparation, on diet (particularly on consumption of promoted foods), and, in some instances, on BMI values (2). We have seen positive changes at institutional levels, such as improved stocking and sales of healthier foods. Level of exposure to different intervention components is strongly associated with impact. In our most recent multi-level trial (B’More Healthy Communities for Kids) we have implemented an agent-based model (ABM) (3), which is being used to engage policy makers and stakeholders in dialogues about programs and policies and to build sustainable and effective solutions to improving the food environment in Baltimore City.

Conclusions
Environmental interventions comprise a set of promising approaches for addressing the global obesity epidemic. We highlight the importance of developing relationships with communities and key stakeholders, implementing appropriate formative research, and achieving adequate exposure in order to strengthen the evaluation of programs and inform decision making. A systems science approach is a novel tool to predict the impact of obesity prevention programs and policies. Further work is needed to disseminate, expand and sustain these initiatives at the city, state and federal levels.

Research reported in this publication was supported by the Global Obesity Prevention Center (GOPC) at Johns Hopkins, and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and the Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health (OD) under award number U54HD070725. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.


   1 
            Gittelsohn J  
            Rowan M  
            Gadhoke P  
           2012 Interventions in small food stores to change the food environment, improve diet and reduce risk from chronic disease Prev Chronic Dis 9 E9 Epub 2012 Feb 16 
2 
            Gittelsohn J  
            Vijayadeva V  
            Davison N  
            Ramirez V  
            Cheung LWK  
            Murphy S  
            Novotny R  
           2010 A food store intervention trial improves caregiver and child food-related psychosocial factors and behaviors in Hawaii Obesity 18 n1s S84 S90 20107467 
3 
            Gittelsohn J  
            Steeves EA  
            Mui Y  
            Kharmats AY  
            Hopkins LC  
            Dennis D  
           2014 B’More healthy communities for kids: Design of a multi-level intervention for obesity prevention for low-income African American children BMC Public Health 14 942 10.1186/1471-2458-14-942 25209072 

