LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10118662430479Pediatr Blood CancerPediatr Blood CancerPediatric blood &amp; cancer1545-50091545-501726700915519147210.1002/pbc.25718NIHMS834964ArticleInterdisciplinary Collaboration in Standards of Psychosocial Care Wiener Lori PhD1*Kazak Anne E. PhD, ABPP2Noll Robert B. PhD3Patenaude Andrea Farkas PhD4Kupst Mary Jo PhD51 Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland2 Nemours Children’s Health System, Wilmington, Delaware, Sidney Kimmel Medical School of Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania3 Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania4 Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts5 Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin* Correspondence to: LoriWiener, Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Center for Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. wienerl@mail.nih.gov16 12 2016 12 2015 27 12 2016 62 Suppl 5 S425 S425 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
   Many disciplines contribute significantly to the emotional well being of children with cancer and their families. Individuals who provide supportive care include child life specialists; nurses; pediatric oncologists; spiritual leaders; physical and occupational therapists; nutritionists; psychologists, social workers, and psychiatrists. Mutual respect for professional roles and communication to families of each profession’s role and responsibilities enhances patient and family centered care. Team members collaborate to enhance communication to patients and parents, observe changes in behavior, support decision making, provide empathetic listening, maximize adherence, minimize distress for children and their caregivers related to illness and treatment, and optimize quality of life. They may need to initiate referrals to community psychosocial care providers to initiate assessment or treatment of patients and their families. They may also participate in follow-up or school re-entry activities.

In this special issue, psychosocial care providers refer to behavioral health professionals who assess children and adolescents with cancer and their family members and offer appropriate psychological and/or psychopharmacological treatment. Their responsibilities may include conducting diagnostic evaluation and assessments of children and family members; development and implementation of treatment plans including psychotherapeutic individual and family treatment and evidence- or guideline-based interventions; administration of neuropsychological and/or psychological testing; and participation in team communication to the patient and family. Psychosocial care providers offer consultation on psychological management of patients to members of the pediatric oncology team. Psychiatrists may also evaluate patients and sometimes, parents, provide recommendations for psychopharmacological intervention and monitor effectiveness of the medication in managing pain or distress. Essential training requirements and credentialing for the psychosocial care providers are described in the following article, in this special issue, by Patenaude, Pelletier, and Bingen.[1] Although some roles overlap, respect for the essential training of all team members and the special skills and strengths of each professional group is most beneficial to children with cancer and their family members. 

Conflict of interest: Nothing to declare.


   REFERENCE
1 
            Patenaude AF  
            Pelletier W  
            Bingen K  
           Staff training, communication and documentation standards for psycho-oncology professionals providing care to children with cancer Pediatr Blood Cancer 2015 62 S755 S779 

