LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   10112077727010Expert Rev Mol DiagnExpert Rev. Mol. Diagn.Expert review of molecular diagnostics1473-71591744-835228868924608837810.1080/14737159.2017.1374855NIHMS1500828ArticleIs instrument-free molecular detection possible? Bau Haim H. *Liu Changchun Mauk Michael Song Jinzhao Dept. Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6315* Corresponding author: bau@seas.upenn.edu27 7 2018 08 9 2017 11 2017 01 11 2018 17 11 949 951 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.moleculardiagnosticspoint-of-careinfectious diseasesmutant allelenucleic acidsDNARNA
   Molecular detection determines the presence and quantity of selected nucleic acids associated with pathogens, such as viruses, bacteria, and parasites, as well as a host’s mutant alleles in clinical specimens such as blood, urine, feces, saliva, and tissue and in food and environmental samples. Nucleic acids enable specific identification of organisms, mutations, and drug-resistance. Since pathogens’ nucleic acids do not linger after disease-cessation, their presence in biological samples indicates an acute-state of infection. The low-abundance of nucleic acids of interest in a sample challenges direct detection. However, with the aid of polymerase enzymes and sequence-specific oligo primers, targeted DNA sequences can be rapidly (15–60 min) reproduced with high fidelity to provide a sufficient number of copies for detection with relatively simple means. While RNA cannot be amplified directly, it can be reverse-transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) that is amenable to amplification. The enzymatic amplification method, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), developed by Mullis and co-workers in the 1980s, has become the diagnostic tool of choice in clinical laboratories. PCR requires, however, precise thermal cycling and multiple unit operations for sample processing.

Given the many advantages of nucleic acids as biomarkers, it is desirable to simplify the PCR process to make molecular detection available at the point of care (POC). Molecular detection at the doctor’s office would facilitate timely, evidence-based, precision medicine in resource-poor settings, such as developing countries and rural areas that lack centralized facilities and trained personnel. Detection at home would enable patients to participate in their own care, enable personalized medicine, increase convenience, and reduce time lost from work. Not surprisingly, many strategies have been proposed to bring molecular testing to the point-of-care.

A few researchers1 advocate biosensors to directly detect nucleic acids, arguing that enzyme-free detection avoids the complexities of enzymatic amplification. Biosensors typically rely on hybridizing nucleic acids to immobilized ligands and detecting the captured molecules either with reporters such as beads and fluorescent labels or label-free via capacitance, added mass, or electrochemical detection. Since the target nucleic acids are at low abundance, biosensors are susceptible to non-specific binding and background noise; require consistent, highly diluted samples; use highly sensitive detection methods; and often rely on signal amplification, which may amplify both signal and noise and utilize enzymes. Although, in principle, single molecule detection is feasible and carried out in biophysical labs, in practice biosensors’ sensitivities are orders of magnitude less than can be obtained with enzymatic amplification-based schemes.

To make enzymatic amplification-based nucleic acid detection available outside the laboratory, various groups have developed automated instruments that combine sample processing with PCR in portable machines2,3. These automated systems streamline various unit operations, alleviate the need for trained technicians, and reduce operator errors. They are, however, complex, expensive, low throughput, maintenance-heavy, and likely most suitable for medical centers - not for point-of-care and home use.

To avoid the reliance on thermal cyclers that require fine temperature control for enzymatic amplification, researchers have developed isothermal enzymatic amplification schemes such as Loop Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP, 63–70°C) and Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (RPA, &lt;40°C). Since these newer amplification methods do not require temperature cycling and are tolerant to temperature variations, incubation can be carried out with readily available household appliances such as hot plates and ovens. Moreover, one can borrow concepts long-known to hikers and skiers that utilize an exothermic reaction to produce heat without a need for electrical power. One such common exothermic reaction, featured in ready-to-eat meals, involves a magnesium alloy reacting with water. To regulate temperature, one can use a phase-change material. Basic physics teaches us that as long as a material co-exists in two phases, such as solid and liquid, the temperature remains fixed. Phase-change materials can be synthesized to provide desired melting temperatures. Thus, with an exothermic-reaction and a phase-change material, isothermal enzymatic amplification can be incubated electricity-free. Recently, Liao et al4 described a processor, dubbed smart cup, for an isothermal amplification that utilizes the interaction between a magnesium alloy and water and a phase-change material to incubate LAMP reactions. The processor can be made simple enough to be disposable. Alternatively, both heating and temperature-control can be incorporated into the diagnostic cassette itself5, eliminating the need for a separate incubator.

A ready application of isothermal amplification, dubbed rapid nucleic acid detection, foregoes all or most sample preparation steps6. The tester introduces a small volume of untreated or minimally-treated sample into a reaction mix. Since the sample may contain inhibitors, the sample volume must be just a small fraction, typically less that 5%, of the reaction volume. Since these assays can utilize household heaters or chemical (exothermic) heaters and colorimetric reporters visible to the un-aided eye, eliminating the need for detectors, they are instrumentation-free. Unfortunately, the necessity to operate with very small sample volumes adversely impacts assay sensitivity, resulting in limits of detection exceeding 106 template copies per mL of sample, which may not be satisfactory in some cases. Can we do any better with instrumentation-free molecular assays?

Below, we show that it is possible to achieve sensitivities comparable to benchtop equipment with un-instrumented devices. This is accomplished by combining and streamlining the various unit operations needed for sample preparation and enzymatic amplification. This article describes devices in research and development; none of which has been FDA-approved. Our device’s core is a multifunctional amplification reaction chamber7,8 that includes a nucleic acid isolation membrane at its inlet and pre-stores lyophilized reaction mix, encapsulated in paraffin9. A sample, mixed with lysis agents (when lysis is called for) and salt, is filtered through the nucleic acid isolation membrane, where nucleic acids bind to the membrane and the rest of the filtrate is disposed as waste. Next, the membrane is washed; and the reaction chamber is filled with water, sealed, and heated to its operating temperature. Lyophilization of reagents allows us to store devices with preloaded reaction mix for many months, refrigeration-free. The paraffin-encapsulation protects the reagents during sample introduction and washes. When the reaction chamber is heated to its operating temperature, the paraffin encapsulation melts and moves out of the way, the reaction mix is hydrated, just-in-time, and the enzymatic amplification proceeds. As an added benefit, the paraffin encapsulation provides a hot-start since enzymes and primers are unavailable until the chamber reaches its operating temperature. The amplification process can be tracked, in real time, with various reporters that either change their emission intensity (fluorescence) or color (e.g., Leuco crystal violet) in the presence of amplicons (dsDNA) and molecular beacons. One can also track the production of amplicons by monitoring polymerase reaction byproducts that, among other things, fuel bioluminescence and affect solution pH (the polymerase releases protons). The latter is detectable electrochemically or with an indicator dye. When the reporter is fluorescent, it can be excited with the ubiquitous smartphone’s flashlight. Fluorescence emission, light emission, and colorimetric signal can be recorded, analyzed, and transmitted with a smartphone4,10. Colorimetric dyes can be detected by the un-aided eye without any instrument. Generally, the assay sensitivity is on par with laboratory-based gold standards. For example, we have detected4 fewer than 10 HIV virions in a sample or 100 virions / mL when the sample volume is 100μL. The multifunctional reactor, combined with isothermal enzymatic amplification and exothermic reaction-based incubation, allows us to process samples such as urine and saliva with high sensitivity and without any instrumentation (discounting the smartphone).

When operating with complex samples such as blood, prior to sample introduction into our amplification reactor, we separate plasma from whole blood with a simple, custom made super-hydrophobic plasma separator11 that combines two separation principles: filtration and sedimentation, and does not require centrifugation or electricity. Unique to our device is the ability to separate relatively large volumes of blood, ranging from tens to hundreds of μLs. Our plasma separator can operate as a standalone device or interface seamlessly with our multifunctional amplification reactor. Thus, our method allows one to go from sample to results without any instruments.

Since patients’ symptoms are often non-specific and co-infections may alter symptoms and affect therapy, there is a need for co-detection (multiplexing) of multiple suspected targets in a single sample. For example, regions endemic with the zika virus are also susceptible to many other vector-borne viruses such as dengue, chikungunya, and yellow fever - all resulting in similar initial symptoms, but requiring diverse disease management strategies. Although one can split the sample into multiple, target-specific reaction chambers, this would reduce sensitivity. We address this challenge with a two-stage isothermal amplification process dubbed RAMP12. RAMP’s first stage consists of a RPA process, which is run long enough to greatly increase the number of all templates in the sample, but not so long as to produce a detectable signal. The RPA amplicons are then distributed into individual LAMP chambers, each specialized to detect a single specific target. This two-stage amplification process allows one to co-detect multiple targets (up to 16 have been demonstrated) with greater sensitivity than either RPA or LAMP alone and without a loss in specificity. This highly multiplexed system has the potential of enabling evidence-based medicine and improved standard of care. Other potential applications of such a multiplexed system include gene or microbiota profiling.

Just like real-time PCR (qPCR), our assays are amenable to quantification. When intercalating dye or bioluminescence is used, one can correlate the threshold time of the emitted signal intensity with template concentration. This quantification method requires, however, continuous signal monitoring, which can be done, as we stated above, with a cell phone camera or a USB camera linked to a computer. However, this method ties up the cell phone for the duration of the test and allows one to monitor just one device at a time. This normally should not be a problem unless one needs to process many tests in parallel. To enable high throughput testing, we have devised a new paradigm, dubbed the nuclemeter13, for template quantification. The nuclemeter consists of a conduit, which, among other things, can be made in porous paper, with all the reagents for the amplification reaction dry-stored uniformly along the conduit’s length. Once the conduit has been filled with water and heated to the polymerase incubation temperature, the conduit’s end is exposed to a template. The template diffuses into the conduit and undergoes polymerase while the amplicons keep diffusing. In essence, we form a reaction-diffusion column. After template introduction, the reaction-diffusion column consists of two regions separated with a reaction front, propagating as a wave along the conduit’s length. When an intercalating or colorimetric dye is used to visualize the amplicons, the region upstream of the reaction-front appears bright or colored.

Since no polymerase reaction has taken place downstream of the reaction-front, this region appears dark or colorless. When bioluminescence dye is used, the reaction front appears as a blob of light travelling along the column. Immediately after template introduction, the reaction front’s velocity depends on template concentration. The higher the template concentration, the faster the front propagates. A short time later, once the polymerase reaction upstream of the front has saturated, the front moves at a fixed speed, independent of template concentration. At any given time, we can correlate the reaction front’s location with template concentration, just as one correlates temperature with the length of a mercury column in an old-fashion thermometer. The nuclemeter removes the necessity for continuous monitoring of the polymerase reaction and enables endpoint quantification. It is possible to accommodate multiplexing with many reaction-diffusion columns raying from a sample well, each column specialized to a specific target. Moreover, once initial transients die out, reaction-front velocity is independent of template concentration and depends on polymerase efficiency, which in turn depends on how well primers match the template. In contrast to real-time PCR, in which threshold time depends on both template concentration and polymerase efficiency, the nuclemeter may allow us to tease out polymerase efficiency and include it as a correction when assessing template concentration from reaction front location.

Currently, other than a few pipetting steps needed to wash the bound nucleic acids and to fill the reactors with water, we can carry out molecular detection instrumentation-free. Although simple, such pipetting operations may be deemed undesirable for point-of-care and home use. Hence, our near term objective is to design, prototype, and test manually operated cassettes that store wet reagents in mechanically-actuated blisters and eliminate the need for pipetting while still operating without instrumentation.

In conclusion, inexpensive, high-sensitivity, fully-integrated disposable, instrumentation-free, multiplexed molecular tests are within reach.

Funding

The authors have been funded, in part, by NIH grants 1R21DE026700 and 1R21AI128059.

Declaration of Interest

The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or royalties. Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no relevant financial or other relationships to disclose.


   REFERENCES
1 Metcalf Gavin AD , Shibakawa Akifumi , Patel Hinesh , Sita-Lumsden Ailsa , Zivi Andrea , Rama Nona , Bevan Charlotte L. , and Ladame Sylvain , 2016 , “Amplification-Free Detection of Circulating microRNA Biomarkers from Body Fluids Based on Fluorogenic Oligonucleotide-Templated Reaction between Engineered Peptide Nucleic Acid Probes: Application to Prostate Cancer Diagnosis .” Analytical chemistry 
88 , no. 16 , 8091 –8098 .27498854 
2 Zeka Arzu N. , Tasbakan Sezai , and Cavusoglu Cengiz , 2011 , Evaluation of the GeneXpert MTB/RIF Assay for Rapid Diagnosis of Tuberculosis and Detection of Rifampin Resistance in Pulmonary and Extrapulmonary Specimens , J. Clin. Microbiol 
49  (12 ) 4138 –4141 . doi:10.1128/JCM.05434-11 21956978 
3 Castan Pablo , de Pablo Alicia , Fernandez-Romero Natalia , Miguel Rubio Jose , Cobb Benjamin D. , Mingorance Jesús , and Toro Carlos , 2014 , Point-of-Care System for Detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and Rifampin Resistance in Sputum Samples , J. Clin. Microbiol 
52  (2 ), 502 –507 , doi:10.1128/JCM.02209-13 24478480 
4 Shih-Chuan Liao , Peng Jing , Mauk Michael G. , Awasthi Sita , Song Jinzhao , Friedman Harvey , Bau Haim , and Liu Changchun , 2016 , Smart Cup: A Minimally-Instrumented, Smartphone- Based Point-of-Care Molecular Diagnostic Device , Sensors and Actuators B , 229 , 232 –238 . doi:10.1016/i.snb.2016.01.073 
5 Liu C , Mauk M , Hart R , Qiu X , and Bau H,H , 2011 , Self Heating Cartridge for Molecular Diagnostics , Lab on Chip 
11 , 2686 –2692 . DOI: 10.1039/C1LC20345B . 
6 Curtis KA , Rudolph DL , Nejad I , Singleton J , Beddoe A , Weigl B , LaBarre P , and Own SM , “Isothermal amplification using a chemical heating device for point-of-care detection of HIV-1 ” PLoS  (2012 ) 7 ,2 
e31432 
7 Liu C , Geva E , Mauk M , Qiu X , Abrams WR , Malamud D , Curtis K , Owen SM , and Bau HH , 2011, An Isothermal Amplification Reactor with an Integrated Isolation Membrane for Point-of-Care Detection of Infectious Diseases , Analyst 
2011 , 136 , 2069 –2076  DOI:10.1039/C1AN00007A 21455542 
8 United States Patent 9,476,102 , “Isothermal Nucleic Acid Amplification Reactor With Integrated Solid State Membrane ”, Bau H ., Abrams H, , Geva WR, , Mauk E, , Liu MG, , Malamud C, , and D., Qiu X , 10 
25 , 2016 .
9 Kim J , Byun D , Mauk M,G , and Bau H,H , 2009 , A Disposable, Self-Contained PCR Chip , Lab on Chip 
9 , 606 –612 . (DOI 10.1039/b807915c )
10 Song J , Mauk M,G , Hackett B , Cherry S , Bau HH , Liu C , 2016 , Instrument-Free Point-of-Care Molecular Detection of Zika Virus , Analytical Chemistry 
88  (14 ), 7289 –7294 , DOI: 10.1021/acs.analchem.6b01632 . 27306491 
11 Changchun Liu ; Shih-Chuan Liao ; Jinzhao Song ; Michael Mauk ; Xuanwen Li ; Gaoxiang Wu ; Dengteng Ge ; Robert Greenberg ; Shu Yang ; Haim Bau , 2016 , “A High-Efficiency Superhydrophobic Plasma Separator ” Lab on Chip 
16 , 553 –560 . DOI: 10.1039/c5lc01235j 
12 Song J , Liu C , Mauk M,G , Rankin S,C , Lok J,B , Greenberg R,M , Bau HH , 2017 , Two-stage isothermal enzymatic amplification for concurrent multiplex detection of nucleic acids , Clinical Chemistry . 63  (3 ) 714 –722 , doi:10.1373/clinchem.2016.263665 28073898 
13 Liu C , Sadik M , Mauk M , Edelstein PH , Bushman FD , Gross R , and Bau HH , 2014 , Nuclemeter: A Reaction-Diffusion based Method for Quantifying Nucleic Acids Undergoing Enzymatic Amplification , Nature Scientific Reports 4 . Article number: 7335.  doi: 10.1038/srep07335 

