LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   01477632979CirculationCirculationCirculation0009-73221524-453931180749668861910.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040012NIHMS1528406ArticleCorrection of d-TGA: Sooner rather than later? Rollins Caitlin K. MD12Newburger Jane W. MD, MPH341 Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA2 Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA3 Department of Cardiology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA4 Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MACorrespondence: Jane W. Newburger, MD, MPH, Department of Cardiology, Boston Children’s Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue Boston, MA 02115, Phone: (617) 355-5427, Fax: (617) 739-3784, jane.newburger@cardio.chboston.org4 5 2019 10 6 2019 11 6 2019 11 6 2020 139 24 2739 2741 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
   With survival into adulthood now expected for patients with even the most complex forms of congenital heart disease (CHD), improvements in the neurologic and developmental outcomes of CHD survivors are an increasingly urgent priority. Yet identification of modifiable risk factors for adverse neurodevelopmental outcome remains a challenge. Complex CHD is comprised of rare, heterogeneous lesions and diverging management strategies, as well as multiple additive, colinear, and interacting risk factors, including genetic variants, parental education, fetal circulatory disturbances, intraoperative factors, and postoperative complications. Neurodevelopmental risk can further accrue from morbidities and procedures occurring after discharge, e.g., arrhythmia, malnutrition, or stroke. Although bypass variables are among the most easily modified risk factors and hence most amenable to randomized trials, the largest percent variance in neurodevelopmental outcomes is likely contributed by preoperative and innate patient factors.1 To sort out their contribution to neurologic outcome, it is helpful to study a homogeneous patient population with few potential confounders.

Patients with dextro-transposition of the greater arteries (d-TGA) with intact ventricular septum (IVS) or ventricular septal defect (VSD), repaired with the arterial switch operation (ASO), constitute an ideal group in which to assess the relative contributions of preoperative risk factors to neurologic outcomes. They rarely have coexisting extra-cardiac anomalies or genetic syndromes. Moreover, residual significant hemodynamic problems following the ASO are uncommon, with infrequent need for reoperation.2 Yet, adolescents with d-TGA show abnormalities in neurodevelopment and brain structure. They have impaired performance in tasks of memory, visual-spatial skills, attention, executive functioning, and social cognition relative to the general population.3, 4 Brain MRIs in adolescents with d-TGA show abnormalities in white matter microstructure and cortical thickness.5, 6 In some cases, brain network abnormalities correlate with cognitive disabilities.7, 8 Because the d-TGA population is so healthy after recovery from the ASO, their abnormalities of brain structure and function likely arise from a combination of innate, fetal/perinatal, and perioperative risk factors.

To understand the origins of neurodevelopmental disabilities in d-TGA, it is helpful to review its unique physiology. The pulmonary artery and aorta are transposed in d-TGA, meaning that in utero oxygen and nutrient-rich blood from the placenta is preferentially directed to the lungs, while deoxygenated, nutrient-deficient blood is recirculated to the brain. Increased cerebral blood flow may partially compensate, but fetal cerebral oxygen and nutrient delivery is lower than normal. After birth, especially among those with IVS or small VSD, patients with d-TGA are often profoundly cyanotic, with reduced cerebral oxygen delivery.9 Because the work capacity of the left ventricle declines rapidly after birth in children with d-TGA with IVS or small VSD, primary repair with the ASO must be performed in the first few weeks of life. In those with a large VSD, in whom left ventricular pressure is maintained at systemic levels, elective repair can be performed safely a little later from the cardiac viewpoint. Variation in the timing of surgical repair gives rise to the important question tackled by Lim and colleagues10 in this issue of the journal: given the potential cumulative effects of deficient fetal and postnatal cerebral oxygen and nutrient delivery, is earlier surgical repair of d-TGA, when possible, better for the brain?

To address this question, one must consider the biology of early brain development. Neurobiological processes beginning in mid-gestation and lasting beyond the perinatal timeframe are critical for establishing structural brain organization and network connectivity that persist throughout life.11 At mid-gestation, cerebral white matter axons begin to grow rapidly, a phase that continues throughout the third trimester. Premyelinating oligodendrocytes, which ultimately differentiate into myelin-producing oligodendrocytes, ensheath these axons, with mature forms becoming abundant in the white matter after birth. Subplate neurons - a transient cell population underlying the developing cortex that is critical for establishing thalamocortical and corticocortical connections - peak during the third trimester and largely undergo apoptosis following birth. Synaptogenesis occurs rapidly after birth with myelination and synaptic refinement continuing for years thereafter. The subventricular zone, a deep, proliferative layer of the brain near the ventricles, produces neural progenitor cells that ultimately migrate to the cortex. The subventricular zone appears early in gestation but remains active through infancy, diminishing after about 18 months of age. The timeframe preceding surgery thus coincides with a period of active cerebral growth and development necessary to establish normal brain structure.

The complex and dynamic interplay of various cell populations during the perinatal period heightens the neurologic risk associated with circulatory disturbances. Premyelinating oligodendrocytes in animal models are sensitive to oxygen and nutrient deprivation, leading to maturational arrest with failure to develop into myelin-producing oligodendrocytes. Subplate neurons similarly show maturational changes in response to oxygen and nutrient deprivation. Collectively, these abnormalities may diminish axonal development, impede myelin production, and result in permanent changes to synaptogenesis. Recently, Morton and colleagues developed a piglet model of chronic hypoxia demonstrating impaired subventricular proliferation and neurogenesis, with corresponding reduction in cortical growth; these findings mirrored postmortem neuropathology findings in infants with CHD.12 Thus, early translational evidence supports the hypothesis that hypoxic injury to selectively vulnerable cell populations may have deleterious effects on downstream brain development in CHD.

The preoperative period is also rife with opportunities for brain injury. Patients with d-TGA, especially those with IVS or small VSD, can be profoundly cyanotic and even acidotic at a time that cerebral oxygen demand is increasing.13 The use of prostaglandins to maintain ductal patency improves oxygen saturation and allows corrective surgery to be performed electively, but lowers pulmonary vascular resistance and worsens pulmonary overcirculation. Brain injury can also be related to preoperative palliative procedures (e.g., balloon atrial septostomy) and hemodynamic instability. Of note, the parallel circulation in uncorrected d-TGA provides a direct pathway for bubbles or thrombi associated with venous lines or catheterization sites to embolize to the brain. Lower preoperative oxygenation and a longer time to surgery have been previously associated with higher rates of white matter injury in d-TGA.14 Moreover, later age at the ASO may prolong hospital length of stay, increasing hospitalization-related complications, reducing developmental stimulation, and delaying optimal nutrition. Anderson and colleagues demonstrated that children with d-TGA who underwent the ASO after age 3 days were more likely to have major complications, including seizures and stroke.15 Taken together, available evidence suggests benefit to shortening the period between birth and cardiac surgery for critical CHD, yet data from diverse centers and settings on this topic are still limited.

In this issue of the journal, Lim and colleagues performed pre- and post-operative brain MRI on 45 patients undergoing surgical repair of TGA.10 They found that older age at surgery and presence of a VSD were associated with reduced peri-operative brain growth. Age at surgery was also predictive of lower language scores on the Bayley-III. Notably, these findings persisted after excluding patients with two major preoperative complications: use of ECMO and necrotizing enterocolitis. Overall these findings suggest that earlier repair of d-TGA may lead to improved structural brain development and neurodevelopmental outcome.

The authors should be commended for this important contribution, which explores a potentially modifiable risk factor to improve outcome in the d-TGA population. Nonetheless, the observational study design limits our ability to draw conclusions about cause and effect. Although reported findings were similar after excluding six patients with preoperative ECMO or necrotizing enterocolitis, it is likely that some confounding by indication remained. For example, other important preoperative complications, such as neonatal abstinence syndrome or brain injury, may have been independently associated with both longer time to surgery and impaired brain growth. Patients with earlier vs. later repair had higher preoperative saturations and were likely less sick, as indicated by shorter duration of preoperative endotracheal intubation, shorter total hospital length of stay, and less decline in body weight z score from pre- to post-operatively. The groups had similar postoperative brain-to-body weight ratios, suggesting that delayed repair may be associated with overarching morbidity rather than a selective central nervous system insult. Importantly, socioeconomic status was not recorded in the study and could be a determinant of both timing of surgery and neurodevelopmental outcomes.

Although one cannot reach causal inference without clinical trials, there is face validity to the notion that earlier repair of d-TGA is associated with superior brain health by establishing normal oxygen and nutrient delivery to the rapidly developing brain while minimizing the preoperative period of enhanced medical risk. The work of Lim et al. adds to a growing body of evidence suggesting that earlier repair of d-TGA is associated with improved medical outcomes15 and should nudge us toward a default strategy of earlier surgery for critical CHD. That said, the timing of repair within the earliest weeks of life must be tailored to each infant’s particular medical status, as well as to technical considerations of the center’s surgical team. Further, trade-offs in optimizing the age at repair may differ according to the type of CHD. Future studies should validate this study’s findings across other centers and other critical congenital heart lesions.

Funding source: Research reported in this publication was supported by National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke of the National Institutes of Health under award number K23NS101120, an American Academy of Neurology Clinical Research Training Fellowship, and the Farb Family Foundation. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None.


   References
1. The International Cardiac Collaborative on Neurodevelopment (ICCON) Investigators . Impact of operative and postoperative factors on neurodevelopmental outcomes after cardiac operations . Ann Thorac Surg . 2016 ;102 :843 –849 .27496628 
2. Khairy P , Clair M , Fernandes SM , Blume ED , Powell AJ , Newburger JW , Landzberg MJ  and Mayer JE , Jr. Cardiovascular outcomes after the arterial switch operation for d-transposition of the great arteries . Circulation . 2013 ;127 :331 –339 .23239839 
3. Bellinger DC , Wypij D , Rivkin MJ , DeMaso DR , Robertson RL Jr., Dunbar-Masterson C , Rappaport LA , Wernovsky G , Jonas RA  and Newburger JW . Adolescents with d-transposition of the great arteries corrected with the arterial switch procedure: neuropsychological assessment and structural brain imaging . Circulation . 2011 ;124 :1361 –1369 .21875911 
4. Heinrichs AK , Holschen A , Krings T , Messmer BJ , Schnitker R , Minkenberg R  and Hovels-Gurich HH . Neurologic and psycho-intellectual outcome related to structural brain imaging in adolescents and young adults after neonatal arterial switch operation for transposition of the great arteries . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2014 ;148 :2190 –2199 .24951021 
5. Rivkin MJ , Watson CG , Scoppettuolo LA , Wypij D , Vajapeyam S , Bellinger DC , DeMaso DR , Robertson RL Jr. and Newburger JW . Adolescents with d-transposition of the great arteries repaired in early infancy demonstrate reduced white matter microstructure associated with clinical risk factors . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2013 ;146 :543 –549  e1.23375991 
6. Watson CG , Asaro LA , Wypij D , Robertson RL Jr., Newburger JW  and Rivkin MJ . Altered gray matter in adolescents with d-transposition of the great arteries . J Pediatr . 2016 ;169 :36 –43  e1.26553098 
7. Rollins CK , Watson CG , Asaro LA , Wypij D , Vajapeyam S , Bellinger DC , DeMaso DR , Robertson RL Jr., Newburger JW  and Rivkin MJ . White matter microstructure and cognition in adolescents with congenital heart disease . J Pediatr . 2014 ;165 :936 –944 .25217200 
8. Schmithorst VJ , Panigrahy A , Gaynor JW , Watson CG , Lee V , Bellinger DC , Rivkin MJ  and Newburger JW . Organizational topology of brain and its relationship to ADHD in adolescents with d-transposition of the great arteries . Brain Behav . 2016 ;6 :e00504 .27547505 
9. Lim JM , Kingdom T , Saini B , Chau V , Post M , Blaser S , Macgowan C , Miller SP  and Seed M . Cerebral oxygen delivery is reduced in newborns with congenital heart disease . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2016 ;152 :1095 –1103 .27349283 
10. Lim JM , Porayette P , Marini D , Chau V , Au-Young S , Saini A , Ly LG , Blaser S , Shroff M , Branson HM , Sananes R , Hickey EJ , Gaynor JW , Van Arsdell G , Miller SP  and Seed M . Associations between Age at Arterial Switch Operation, Brain Growth and Language Development in Infants with Transposition of the Great Arteries . Circulation . 2019 . [In Press]
11. Volpe JJ . Brain injury in premature infants: a complex amalgam of destructive and developmental disturbance . Lancet Neurology . 2009 ;8 :110 –124 .19081519 
12. Morton PD , Korotcova L , Lewis BK , Bhuvanendran S , Frank JA , Jonas RA , Gallo V  and Ishibashi N . Abnormal neurogenesis and cortical growth in congenital heart disease . Sci Transl Med . 2017 ;9 :eaah7029 .28123074 
13. Lynch JM , Ko T , Busch DR , Newland JJ , Winters ME , Mensah-Brown K , Boorady TW , Xiao R , Nicolson SC , Montenegro LM , Gaynor JW , Spray TL , Yodh AG , Naim MY  and Licht DJ . Preoperative cerebral hemodynamics from birth to surgery in neonates with critical congenital heart disease . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg . 2018 ;156 :1657 –1664 .29859676 
14. Petit CJ , Rome JJ , Wernovsky G , Mason SE , Shera DM , Nicolson SC , Montenegro LM , Tabbutt S , Zimmerman RA  and Licht DJ . Preoperative brain injury in transposition of the great arteries is associated with oxygenation and time to surgery, not balloon atrial septostomy . Circulation . 2009 ;119 :709 –716 .19171858 
15. Anderson BR , Ciarleglio AJ , Hayes DA , Quaegebeur JM , Vincent JA  and Bacha EA . Earlier arterial switch operation improves outcomes and reduces costs for neonates with transposition of the great arteries . J Am Coll Cardiol . 2014 ;63 :481 –487 .24184243 

