LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   101301086ISME JISME JThe ISME journal1751-73621751-737030647460647422810.1038/s41396-019-0346-7EMS80984ArticleFueled by methane: Deep-sea sponges from asphalt seeps gain their
nutrition from methane-oxidizing symbionts Rubin-Blum Maxim 18*Antony Chakkiath Paul 1Sayavedra Lizbeth 19Martínez-Pérez Clara 1Birgel Daniel 2Peckmann Jörn 2Wu Yu-Chen 3Cardenas Paco 4MacDonald Ian 5Marcon Yann 6Sahling Heiko 7†Hentschel Ute 3Dubilier Nicole 17*
1 Max-Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Celsiusstrasse 1,
28359 Bremen, Germany
2 Institute for Geology, Center for Earth System Research and
Sustainability, University of Hamburg, 20146 Hamburg, Germany
3 GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research, RD3 Marine Microbiology
and Christian-Albrechts University of Kiel, Düsternbrooker Weg 20, D-24105
Kiel, Germany
4 Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacognosy, BioMedical Centre,
Husargatan 3, Uppsala University, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden
5 Florida State University, POB 3064326, Tallahassee, FL 32306,
USA
6 Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research,
HGF-MPG Group for Deep Sea Ecology and Technology, Am Handelshafen 12, 27570
Bremerhaven, Germany
7 MARUM, Center for Marine Environmental Sciences, University of
Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany
8 Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, Tel Shikmona,
3108000, Haifa, Israel
9 Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United
Kingdom* Corresponding authors† Deceased 23 April 2018

15 1 2019 15 1 2019 5 2019 01 11 2019 13 5 1209 1225 This file is available to download for the purposes of text mining, consistent with the principles of UK copyright law.Sponges host a remarkable diversity of microbial symbionts, however, the
benefit their microbes provide is rarely understood. Here, we describe two new
sponge species from deep-sea asphalt seeps and show that they live in a
nutritional symbiosis with methane-oxidizing (MOX) bacteria. Metagenomics and
imaging analyses revealed unusually high amounts of MOX symbionts in hosts from
a group previously assumed to have low microbial abundances. These symbionts
belonged to the Marine Methylotrophic Group 2 clade. They are host-specific and
likely vertically transmitted, based on their presence in sponge embryos and
streamlined genomes, which lacked genes typical of related free-living MOX.
Moreover, genes known to play a role in host-symbiont interactions, such as
those that encode eukaryote-like proteins, were abundant and expressed. Methane
assimilation by the symbionts was one of the most highly expressed metabolic
pathways in the sponges. Molecular and stable carbon isotope patterns of lipids
confirmed that methane-derived carbon was incorporated into the hosts. Our
results revealed that two species of sponges, although distantly related,
independently established highly specific, nutritional symbioses with two
closely related methanotrophs. This convergence in symbiont acquisition
underscores the strong selective advantage for these sponges in harboring MOX
bacteria in the food-limited deep sea.


   Introduction
Symbioses with microorganisms have played a central role in shaping the
ecology and evolution of marine animals [1].
Sponges are one of the oldest animal phyla and may have lived in symbiosis with
microbial partners for hundreds of million years [2–4]. Most sponge species
belong to one of two general categories: High microbial abundance (HMA) sponges such
as those from the orders Agelasida and Verongida harbor dense microbial consortia
with high phylogenetic diversity, while low microbial abundance (LMA) sponges such
as those from the order Poecilosclerida have several orders of magnitude fewer
symbionts with low phylogenetic diversity [5].
In both HMA and LMA sponges, the microbial symbionts are hypothesized to increase
their host's fitness, for example by recycling nutrients and producing
secondary metabolites that can deter predators [4, 6–8]. To date, the functional diversity of microorganisms
associated with sponges has been studied primarily in hosts from shallow-water
habitats, using metagenomics [9–15], proteomics [16] and transcriptomics [17–21]. However, the
remarkable diversity of the microbiota in most shallow-water sponges [3] has made it highly challenging to understand
their functional and ecological role. Even less is known about the metabolism,
ecology and evolutionary history of the microorganisms that live in symbiosis with
deep-sea sponges.

In the deep sea, light is insufficient to sustain photosynthetic primary
production, the input of particulate organic carbon from the surface is low, and
nutrition is often limited [22]. While
shallow-water sponges primarily gain their nutrition by filter-feeding on planktonic
microorganisms and organic matter [4], some
sponges have adapted to the deep sea, where low amounts of particulate organic
carbon make filter-feeding energetically unfavorable, by becoming carnivores [23–25]. Sponges from cold seeps and hydrothermal vents in the deep sea may
have evolved an alternative nutritional strategy. In these environments, abundant
chemosynthetic primary production is fueled by reduced energy sources. Analyses of
microbial communities based on metagenomics and 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing,
as well as carbon stable isotope values, indicated that sponges from seeps are
associated with chemosynthetic and hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria [25–30]. Thus, in addition to filter-feeding or carnivory, these sponges
could gain a considerable proportion of their nutrition from chemosynthetic
symbionts.

In contrast to the well-studied chemosynthetic symbioses of more highly
evolved invertebrate groups such as bivalves and annelids [31], little is known about these associations in sponges. To
gain a better understanding of chemosynthetic symbioses in deep-sea sponges, we used
metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, fluorescence and electron microscopy, as well as
lipid (fatty acids and sterols) and stable isotope analyses to study two sponge
species from hydrocarbon seeps at Campeche Knolls at 2900-3100 m depth in the
southern Gulf of Mexico. These sites are characterized by prolific asphalt flows,
oil seepage, gas hydrates and gas venting [32]. Campeche sponges were previously shown to host hydrocarbon-degrading
Cycloclasticus bacteria, but these make up only about 5% of
their bacterial community [33]. The majority
of the sponge microbiota (50-70%) was dominated by methane-oxidizing (MOX) bacteria
(the abbreviation MOX is also used for methane oxidizer(s) in the following), [33]. In this study, we provide in-depth
insights into the symbiosis between sponges from the Campeche seeps and their MOX
bacteria, with the goal of better understanding the evolutionary history and
physiology of the MOX symbionts, revealing the mechanisms that might determine the
specificity of the sponge-MOX association, comparing the genomic potential of the
symbiotic MOX with that of free-living MOX, and tracing the incorporation of
methane-derived carbon into sponge biomass.

Materials and Methods
Sample collection
Sponges were collected with the remotely-operated vehicle MARUM-QUEST
during the RV Meteor M114-2 cruise to the Campeche Knolls in March 2015. The
sponges were collected by placing asphalt pieces on which they grew in an
insulated polypropylene "bio-box" to protect against temperature
changes during the ascension of the ROV to warm surface waters (ascension time
from seafloor to onboard ship approximately two hours). We sampled two
encrusting sponge individuals, one from Chapopote Knoll (21°54' N;
93°26' W, 2925 m water depth) and one from Mictlan Knoll
(22°1' N; 93°14' W, 3106 m water depth), which are
approximately 25 km apart from each other (Figure
1). A third sponge individual with a branching morphology was
collected from the same site at Chapopopote as the encrusting sponge. The
sponges appeared healthy and intact before collection, with no evidence of
tissue damage. A detailed description of the collection sites is available
elsewhere [32]. Sponge distributions at
Chapopote were estimated using mosaic mapping (see Supplementary Methods
4).

After ROV recovery, the asphalt pieces with the sponges were kept on
board in the seawater from the "bio-box" at 4°C. For
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses, subsamples from each sponge
individual were fixed on board approximately 1 hour after ROV recovery in
RNAlater® (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and stored at -80°C. Subsamples for
microscopy were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde in 1x phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) for at most 12 h at 4°C, rinsed three times in 1x PBS, and stored
at 4°C in 0.5x PBS/50% ethanol. Subsamples for transmission electron
microscopy were fixed in PHEM buffer (PIPES, HEPES, EGTA and MgCl2,
see [34]). Samples for lipid biomarker
analysis were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
The probe used in this study, MTC849 probe (5` –
CGTTAGCTCCACCACTAAG – 3`), was designed with ARB [35] to target the 16S rRNA gene sequences
of the symbiotic MOX of both Campeche sponge species. This probe is a
modification of MTC850 probe, designed to target Marine Methylotrophic Group
(MMG) 2 MOX [36]. Apart from the
symbiotic and MMG2 MOX, the MTC849 probe targets the closely-related
Methylomonas and Methylomarinum clades.
The MTC849 oligonucleotide was double-labeled with Atto594 dye (Biomers, Ulm,
Germany), and applied to 8 μm sections of sponge tissue using
hybridization buffer with 20% formamide as described previously [37]. These hybridization conditions are
assumed to ensure specificity, given the three mismatches that the MTC849 probe
had to the 16S rRNA gene sequences of all other Campeche sponge bacteria [38].The general bacterial probe EUB338
[39] was used as a positive control
and the NON338 probe was used as a control for background autofluorescence
[40]. Photomicrographs were acquired
with a Zeiss Axioplan 2 epifluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany) or
with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (LSM 780, Carl Zeiss, Germany).
Brightness and contrast of the images were adjusted with Adobe Photoshop (Adobe
Systems, Inc., USA).

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Subsamples of the two encrusting and one branching sponge individuals
were washed with 50 mM cacodylate buffer, post-fixed with 2% osmium tetroxide in
the buffer for 1.5 h at 4°C, and then washed with Milli-Q water.
Following overnight staining in 0.5% uranyl acetate (Merck, Germany), the
samples were washed with Milli-Q water, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series,
and then transferred into propylene oxide (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). The samples
were infiltrated with Epon-812 resin (1:1 resin to propylene oxide) overnight
and rinsed in this resin twice for 2 h. They were then transferred into fresh
resin for 1 h and polymerized in embedding capsules at 60°C for at least
48 h. Ultra-thin (70 nm) sections were cut with an ultramicrotome (Leica EM UC7,
Austria), mounted on pioloform coated grids, and contrasted with 2.5% uranyl
acetate in ethanol for 20 min and subsequently, with Reynold’s lead
citrate for 10 min. Ultrathin sections were imaged at 80 kV on a Tecnai G2
Spirit BioTwin transmission electron microscope (FEI Company, USA). We were able
to produce high-quality micrographs of the two encrusting sponge individuals,
but not of the branching sponge individual.

DNA and RNA extraction and sequencing
We extracted DNA and RNA from the two encrusting sponge individuals and
from two different branches of the same branching sponge individual. DNA and RNA
were extracted in parallel with the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, with an extra
DNase I digestion step on RNA columns to eliminate contaminating DNA. DNA/RNA
quality was assessed with the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara,
USA). We were not able to extract RNA in sufficient amounts for transcriptomic
analyses of the branching sponge individual. cDNA was synthesized with Ovation
RNA-Seq System V2 (NuGen, San Carlos, CA, USA). Genomic DNA and cDNA libraries
were generated with the DNA library prep kit for Illumina (BioLABS, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany). All samples were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform
at the Max Planck Genome Centre (Cologne). For one subsample of the branching
sponge, 41 million 150 bp paired-end metagenomic reads were generated. For the
remaining three libraries, 12.5 million 250 bp paired-end metagenomic reads were
generated, while the remaining 15.5-29.5 million were generated as 150 bp
paired-end reads. 30 and 38 million 100 bp paired-end cDNA reads were generated
from the Mictlan and Chapopote encrusting sponge RNA extracts, respectively.

Genome analyses
Individual metagenomes were assembled with IDBA-UD [41], following decontamination, quality
filtering (QV=2) and adapter-trimming with the BBDuk tool from the BBMap suite
(Bushnell B, http://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/). Individual symbiont
genomes were binned based on genome coverage, GC content and taxonomic
affiliation using gbtools, (Supplementary Figure S1), [42]. These bins were reassembled with Spades V3.10 [43, 44], using a maximum k-mer length of 127, following re-mapping of
Illumina reads to the bins using BBMap with 0.98 minimum identity. Following the
manual removal of contigs shorter than 800 bp and contamination screening,
quality metrics were calculated with Quast [45] and CheckM [46]. Symbiont
draft genomes and transcriptome reads were deposited in NCBI under accession
numbers PRJNA475438 and PRJNA475442. Downstream genome analyses are summarized
in Supplementary Methods
S1.

Transcriptome analyses
Adapters and ribosomal RNA genes were removed from transcriptome reads
with BBDuk. Transcriptome reads were mapped to the individual methanotroph
genome assemblies with BBMap (minimum identity value of 0.98). Mapped reads were
assigned to genomic features with featureCounts [47]. Relative RNA levels were estimated with transcripts per million
(TPM) normalization [48]. The
metatranscriptomes were assembled with Trinity [49] and the transcripts were quantified with an
align_and_estimate_abundance.pl script from the Trinity package, using RSEM
quantification method [50].

Phylogenomics
Phylogenomic reconstructions were performed with phylogenomics-tools
scripts (DOI:10.5281/zenodo.46122). Marker proteins that are universally
conserved across the bacterial domain were extracted from genomes using AMPHORA2
[51]. Eighteen single copy markers
that were present in all genomes analyzed in this study were used for alignment
with MUSCLE [52]. The marker alignments
were concatenated into a single partitioned alignment. Poorly aligned or
misaligned regions were removed from the alignments. The maximum likelihood tree
was calculated with MEGA7 [53] using the
LG model [54].

Lipid biomarker analysis
Lipid biomarkers were extracted from one individual of branching and one
individual of encrusting sponge (both collected at Chapopote). Phospholipid
fatty acids were hydrolyzed by saponification with 6% KOH in methanol. Sterols
were extracted with dichloromethane:methanol (3:1) three times. The resulting
total lipid extract and the saponification extract were combined. The hydrolyzed
free fatty acid salts were released from the aqueous phase by adding HCl until
pH 2. Then, the combined extracts were separated by solid phase column
chromatography into four fractions. The resulting fatty acids and the alcohols
were analyzed on a Thermo Electron Trace DSQ II coupled gas-chromatograph-mass
spectrometer (GC-MS) for quantification and identification. The GC-MS was
equipped with a 30 m HP-5 MS UI fused silica capillary column (0.25 mm i.d.,
0.25 µm film thickness). The carrier gas was helium. The GC temperature
program used for both fractions was as follows: 60°C (1 min), from
60°C to 150°C at 10°/min, from 150°C to 325°C
at 4°C/min, 25 min isothermal. Identification of compounds was based on
retention times and published mass spectral data. Double bond positions of
unsaturated fatty acids were identified by the addition of a dimethyl disulfide
(DMDS) adduct to an aliquot of the saponified fatty acid fraction [55]. Further, compound-specific carbon
stable isotope compositions of fatty acids and sterols were measured on a gas
chromatograph (Agilent 6890) coupled with a Thermo Finnigan Combustion III
interface to a Finnigan Delta Plus XL isotope ratio mass spectrometer (GC-IRMS).
The GC conditions were identical to those mentioned above for GC-MS
analyses.

Results and Discussion
Novel sponge species are abundant at Chapopote
Morphological analyses of both sponge morphotypes revealed that these
have not yet been described. We name them here Hymedesmia
(Stylopus) methanophila sp. nov. and
Iophon methanophila sp. nov. (order Poecilosclerida). These
belong to two different genera and are only distantly related to each other
(based on 90% identity of their cytochrome c oxidase subunit I
(COI) gene sequences). A full description of the morphology
and phylogeny of these two sponge species is available in Supplementary File
SF1.

At Chapopote and Mictlan, H. (S.)
methanophila and I. methanophila occurred
on fragmented asphalt accumulations next to sites of active seepage,
characterized by gas and oil effusions and darkly colored substrates (Supplementary Figure S2).
I. methanophila individuals were often observed growing on
the tubes of tubeworms. Based on our mosaic mapping of the Chapopote site, we
estimate that the sponges colonized approximately 30% of the hard substrates in
areas of active seepage (Supplementary Figure S2). We often observed grazers in association
with the sponges, in particular, galatheid crabs (Figure 1). These observations, together with observations of similar
sponge abundances during a 2005 cruise to Chapopote [56], suggest that these sponges have made up a considerable
part of the biomass at Chapopote for over twelve years, and are thus likely to
influence the composition of the seep community and contribute to its food
web.

Campeche sponges host high abundances of methane-oxidizing bacteria
Analyses of the microbial communities hosted by H.
(S.) methanophila and I.
methanophila revealed that their dominant members were MOX
(35.9-67.6% of the microbial community; these values and the following in this
paragraph are based on relative 16S rRNA read frequencies in the metagenomes, as
well as the frequencies of metagenomic reads that mapped to the MOX genomes, see
Supplementary
Methods and Table 1). In both
host species, Proteobacteria made up the vast majority of the microbial
community (94.8-99.9%), and included chemoautotrophic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria
from the SUP05 clade (4.6-20.2%) and hydrocarbon-degrading
Cycloclasticus symbionts (6.0-8.4%), which have been
described elsewhere [33]. Such high
abundances of Proteobacteria have not been commonly found in HMA sponges. Most
HMA sponges harbor highly diverse microbial communities that are often dominated
by the bacterial phyla Chloroflexi, Acidobacteria, and Actinobacteria [57].

Although the low phylogenetic diversity of the microbial community in
Campeche sponges is typical of LMA hosts, fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) revealed that the abundances of bacteria were more typical of HMA sponges
[5] (Figure 2). FISH with a probe specific to the MOX 16S rRNA sequences
in both host species revealed that these bacteria were present in high numbers
in the sponge mesohyl (the gelatinous matrix within a sponge that fills the
space between its external and internal cell layers). Although the Campeche
sponges belong to an order (Poecilosclerida) previously described as consisting
of only LMA species, they have traits typical of both LMA sponges (low
phylogenetic diversity) and HMA sponges (high symbiont abundances). They thus
represent an exception to the described dichotomy between HMA and LMA
sponges.

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of H.
(S.) methanophila revealed that their
mesohyl was colonized by a bacterial morphotype characterized by i) a coccoid
shape and intracytoplasmic membrane stacks typical of MOX bacteria; ii) sizes of
500 -1300 nm length and 500 - 900 nm width, and iii) electron-lucent granules
typical of storage compounds, most likely glycogen (Figure 3a, Supplementary Note 1). The distribution pattern of these morphotypes
was similar to that of the MOX bacteria identified with FISH, indicating that we
could identify the MOX symbiont of H. (S.) methanophila with
TEM based on its characteristic ultrastructure. We regularly observed MOX in
stages of division, indicating that they were actively growing in the sponge
matrix (Figure 3b). The MOX were generally
extracellular, but we occasionally found them within host vacuoles in different
stages of degradation (Figure 3c),
indicating that the sponge cells engulf and digest these symbionts. Bacteria
with a very different morphology than that of the MOX symbionts occurred in what
looked like specialized bacteriocyte cells described from other sponge species
[58, 59], but we never observed MOX in these host cells (Figure 3f). The symbiotic MOX were most
abundant in mesohyl regions near the choanocyte chambers (Figure 3a). This indicates that the symbiotic MOX benefit
from being close to the flagellated choanocytes, most likely because these host
cells pump the methane- and oxygen-containing seawater from the seep environment
into the sponge matrix, and thus provide the symbionts with the reductants and
oxidants they need for their energy and carbon metabolism.

Specificity of the sponge-MOX association
The comparison of the MOX symbiont genomes from the two Campeche sponge
species suggests that these are specific to their hosts. The two
H. (S.) methanophila
individuals that were collected 25 km apart at Chapopote and Mictlan, hosted
nearly identical MOX genotypes (99.6±0.9% average nucleotide identity
(ANI)). Only one I. methanophila individual could be collected
from the Campeche seeps (at Chapopote), but ANI values of the MOX symbiont
genomes from two different branches of this individual were nearly identical
(100±0.6%). Comparison of the MOX symbiont genomes from the sympatric
H. (S.) methanophila and
I. methanophila individuals, which were collected from the
same asphalt piece at Chapopote, revealed that these differed considerably from
each other (93.6±2.5% ANI), and can be considered to belong to two
different species (ANI&lt;95%, [59]).
These results suggest that each sponge species hosts a specific MOX genotype,
and imply the presence of recognition and selection mechanisms that underlie the
potential specificity of this symbiosis.

The symbiotic MOX belong to the Marine Methylotrophic Group 2 clade
Phylogenomic reconstruction of eighteen marker proteins, as well as the
phylogenies of 16S rRNA and pmoA (particulate methane
monooxygenase) genes, revealed that the sponge-associated MOX belong to the
Marine Methylotrophic Group (MMG) 2 clade (also known as deep-sea clade 2)
within the family ‘Methylomonadaceae’, order Methylococcales
(Figure 4, Supplementary Figures S3 and
S4), [61]. To date, there are
no pure cultures of bacteria from the MMG2 clade, but recently the genomes of
two MMG2 MOX enriched from North Sea sandy sediments with methane as the sole
carbon and energy source were sequenced [62]. Together with the Campeche MOX symbionts, these are currently
the only genomes that have been sequenced from the MMG2 clade.

Interestingly, MMG2 bacteria have been reported from other marine hosts
based on16S rRNA and pmoA gene sequencing, although their
abundances appear to generally be considerably lower than in the Campeche
sponges (Supplementary Figures
S3 and S4). MMG2-related sequences were described from ciliates
collected at methane seeps along the eastern Pacific coast (1.7 – 9.7% of
the ciliate bacterial community based on 16S rRNA tag sequencing), [63], and the squat lobster Shinkaia
crosnieri from hydrothermal vents off Japan (1.7-12.0% of 16S rRNA
clones), [64]. MMG2 sequences were also
found in two sponge species: i) an unidentified poecilosclerid sponge from seeps
in the Gulf of Mexico that is morphologically distinct from our samples [28], and ii) Cladorhiza
methanophila from mud volcanoes off Barbados (16 – 25% based
on 16S rRNA tag sequencing, [25]). MOX
belonging to the MMG2 clade were also found in a Sibolginum cf.
poseidoni tubeworm from a mud volcano in the Northeast
Atlantic (the nine 16S rRNA clones sequenced from the tubeworm all belonged to
MMG2, [65]).

Common to all these hosts is that they occur in methane-rich
environments, such as mud volcanoes, seeps and hydrothermal vents, where
free-living MMG2 bacteria are known to be abundant in both the sediment and the
water column [36]. Given the broad range
of hosts associated with bacteria from the MMG2 clade, from protists to animals
from different phyla, it is highly likely that these associations were
established multiple times independently of each other. Moreover, the MOX
bacterial partners in these associations are phylogenetically distinct from
those of the deep-sea bathymodiolin mussels, which belong to the MMG1 clade
(Figure 4 and Supplementary Figures S3 and
S4), [66]. Our study thus
contributes to revealing the previously unrecognized diversity of methanotrophic
associations on both the bacterial and host side. This diversity suggests that
there are strong selective advantages for both partners in establishing these
beneficial associations in methane-rich environments. Revealing the factors that
contribute to these selective advantages, and distinguishing these from the
mechanisms behind the broad host promiscuity in MMG1 MOX and the apparent
specificity of MMG2 MOX to bathymodiolin mussels, will contribute to
understanding the ecological and evolutionary requirements for establishing
these symbioses.

The symbiotic MOX may be vertically transmitted
We found evidence for vertical transmission of the symbiotic MOX from
one generation to the next. Embryos in the matrix of both H.
(S.) methanophila individuals contained
MOX symbionts based on FISH and TEM analyses (Figures 2 and 3; Supplementary Figure S5).
The symbiotic MOX were observed in the matrix between the embryo cells, but
never inside of sponge cells (Figure 3e).
MOX were also found between follicle-like cells surrounding the egg, as well as
on the periphery of follicle-like cells (Supplementary Figure S5). In the seep sponge
Cladorhiza methanophila, bacteria with features typical of
methane-oxidizing bacteria were also observed in embryos with TEM, indicating
that symbionts are transmitted vertically in this sponge species as well [67].

Genome reduction in the symbiotic MOX
Additional support for our conclusion that the Campeche sponge MOX
symbionts are vertically transmitted is provided by the comparison of their
genome sizes to those of free-living MOX bacteria. The estimated genome sizes of
the Campeche MOX symbionts were between 2.0 and 2.2 Mbp, and thus considerably
reduced in comparison to the 3.9 and 4.0 Mbp genomes of their close relatives
from North Sea sediment enrichments (Figure
5a, Supplementary
Table S1). The genomes of the sponge MOX symbionts were also reduced
in comparison to those of cultivated ‘Methylomonadaceae’ (4.5-5.2
Mbp), although some free-living ‘Methylomonadaceae’ may have
similarly small genomes, e.g. Methylococcales bacterium OPU3_GD_OMZ from a
marine metagenome [68]. Given that the
sponge-associated MOX genomes were highly complete (94.6-96.5%), it is unlikely
that we underestimated their sizes due to incomplete binning (Supplementary Table S1).
As genome reduction is typical for vertically transmitted symbionts, the small
genome sizes of the Campeche sponge MOX symbionts may be a result of accelerated
genome evolution through vertical transmission [69–71]. The very low
guanine + cytosine (GC) content of the symbiont genomes (37.7±0.1% versus
51±4% in cultivated ‘Methylomonadaceae’) may also be a
result of vertical transmission, as known from many other vertically transmitted
symbionts Figure 5a), [72]. However, the closest free-living
relatives of the sponge symbionts, the North Sea bacteria from sediment
enrichments (Figure 4), have similarly low
GC contents of 37.7%, indicating that other factors, such as energetic
constraints, may have played a role in the genome evolution of this clade [73, 74].

Optimization of methane assimilation in sponge symbionts
To better understand the functional adaptations of the sponge MOX to
their symbiotic lifestyle, we compared their genomes to those of free-living MOX
within the ‘Methylomonadaceae’ as well as the MOX symbionts of
bathymodiolin mussels (Figures 4 and 5). We identified 1050 genes in the core
genome of the free-living ‘Methylomonadaceae’, 163 of which were
not found in the sponge MOX symbionts (Fig.
5a, Supplementary
Table 3a). Comparative genomics revealed that the functional
repertoire of the sponge MOX symbionts for the assimilation of methane and other
carbon compounds was reduced in comparison to free-living bacteria within the
‘Methylomonadaceae’ (Figure
4, 5b, Supplementary Figure
S6).

Similar to other ‘Methylomonadaceae’, the sponge MOX
symbionts are type I methanotrophs: The ribulose monophosphate (RuMP) cycle
appears to be their sole pathway for methane incorporation, as key enzymes for
the assimilatory serine cycle, such as hydroxypyruvate reductase, were not found
[75]. Genes not found in the sponge
MOX included those encoding the Entner–Doudoroff (EDD) pathway enzymes,
phosphogluconate dehydratase (Edd) and 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-phosphogluconate
aldolase (Eda), which play a role in methane carbon assimilation via the RuMP
pathway [76]. The sponge MOX symbionts
appear to assimilate single carbon compounds only via the highly efficient
Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) variant of the RuMP cycle, based on
the presence and substantial expression of the genes encoding
fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (fba) and
pyrophosphate-dependent phosphofructokinase (pfk), [76], (Figure
6). The sponge MOX symbionts may, therefore, be more efficient in
using single carbon compounds than the methane-oxidizing symbionts of
bathymodiolin mussels, which only employ the less efficient EDD variant of the
RuMP pathway [76, 77]. This suggests that the symbiotic MOX of sponges are
able to provide nutrition to their hosts at lower methane concentrations than
the mussel symbionts. This hypothesis is supported by our mapping analyses of
the seafloor at Chapopote, as sponges were often situated further from hotspots
of active gas and oil seepage than the mussels (Supplementary Figure
S2).

The symbiotic MOX appear to use a minimal suite of enzymes needed for
methane assimilation. As opposed to most sequenced, free-living MOX, in which
two variants of methanol dehydrogenase, the lanthanide-dependent (XoxF) and the
calcium-dependent (MxaF) methanol dehydrogenase co-occur, only XoxF was found in
the sponge symbionts (Figure 4).
Furthermore, only one pmoCAB operon encoded the methane
monooxygenase, while the pxmABC operon was not found (Figure 4). Despite this genetic minimalism in
genes involved in methane oxidation, these genes, together with the RuMP
pathway, were highly expressed by the symbionts (Figure 6). Moreover, these genes were among the top 1% of the most
well-expressed transcripts in the metatranscriptomes, which included reads that
mapped to both the host and the symbionts. This suggests that methane
assimilation by the symbiotic MOX was among the most active metabolic processes
in the sponge holobiont.

The sponge MOX symbionts may be able to use other sources of carbon
besides methane. Their genomes contained the genes for the TCA cycle, glycogen
synthesis and degradation, as well as the import of multicarbon substrates via
C4-dicarboxylate tripartite ATP-independent periplasmic (TRAP) transporters
(Figure 6, Supplementary Note 1).
Moreover, most of these genes were expressed (Figure 6). This suggests that similar to the mussel MOX symbionts,
which also may use other carbon sources besides methane [77], the sponge MOX symbiont have evolved mechanisms to
deal with fluctuations in methane availability. Indeed, our TEM observations of
electron-lucent granules typical of carbon storage compounds in the MOX sponge
symbionts supports our assumption that glycogen may be used to buffer against
periods of methane deprivation.

Reductive evolution and adaptation to the symbiosis
Comparative analyses of clusters of orthologous groups (COGs) in the
sponge MOX with those of free-living ‘Methylomonadaceae’, as well
as the MOX symbionts of bathymodiolin mussels revealed that physical and biotic
interactions with the environment appear to have shaped the pan-genome of
free-living MOX. In these MOX, functions such as “cell motility”,
“inorganic ion transport and metabolism”, “signal
transduction mechanisms”, “membrane biogenesis”, and
“function unknown” (this diverse group includes toxins, type VI
secretion system, antibiotic resistance, phage and plasmid proteins) were
enriched in comparison to the sponge and mussel symbionts (Figure 5b). The COGs “translation, ribosomal
structure and biogenesis”, “coenzyme transport and
metabolism” and “amino acid transport and metabolism” were
enriched in the sponge MOX symbionts, suggesting that their metabolic repertoire
beyond these housekeeping functions is limited. Large numbers of transposases
and integrases resulted in the enrichment of the COG “replication,
recombination and repair” in the MMG1 clade, which comprises symbionts of
bathymodiolin mussels and a single free-living bacterium M.
sedimenti. Expansion of transposable elements is more common in
symbionts that have recently transitioned to an obligate, host-associated
lifestyle, than in symbionts that have associated with their hosts over long
evolutionary time periods [68, 69, 78, 79]. The sponge
symbioses, therefore, may have pre-dated those of mussels. However, this is
highly speculative, as the free-living MOX M. sedimenti also
has high numbers of transposable elements. The only genes that were shared
between the sponge and mussel symbionts, yet not present in most free-living
‘Methylomonadaceae’, were the narGHIJ genes,
encoding enzymes for nitrate respiration (Supplementary Note 2).
Thus, there appears to be little convergence in the mechanisms the sponge and
mussel symbionts have evolved to establish and maintain associations with their
hosts.

Analysis of the 163 core proteins that were unique to the free-living
‘Methylomonadaceae’ revealed that the sponge symbionts appear to
lack the following functions: i) nutrient uptake (nitrate ABC transporter
NrtABC, the Pho regulon and phosphate transport system); ii) secondary
metabolite production and secretion (Rml proteins that catalyze synthesis of
nucleotide/polyketide sugars and Gsp building blocks of the type 2 secretion
system); and iii) adaptation to hypoxia, based on the absence of the
high-affinity ba3-type cytochrome oxidase [80]) (Figure 4, Supplementary Table 3a).
Further indications that the sponge symbionts are not well adapted to hypoxia
was the apparent lack of genes encoding the soluble NAD-reducing hydrogenase and
acetate kinase, which catalyze fermentation of methane-derived products in many
other MOX [76] (Figure 4). Some genes and pathways involved in nitrogen
metabolism also appear to be lacking in the sponge symbionts. Unlike most
free-living MOX, the sponge symbionts may be incapable of nitrogen fixation and
dissimilatory nitrite reduction to nitrous oxide (Figure 4). As suggested previously for sulfur-oxidizing symbionts
[81], a divergent respiratory nitrate
reductase NarGHIJ, uncommon in most MOX, may play a role in non-canonical
nitrate assimilation in the sponge MOX symbionts, which appear to lack the
assimilatory nitrate reductase Nas (Supplementary Note 2). Altogether, these findings suggest a
reduced functional repertoire of the sponge symbionts, which may have been
shaped by i) adaptation of the sponge MOX to the chemical environment within the
host milieu, ii) metabolic optimization via reduction of functional redundancy
and iii) a very limited range of biotic interactions with free-living
microorganisms. The reduction of such a wide array of functions that appear to
be essential for a free-living lifestyle suggests that the sponge MOX may have
entered the ‘rabbit hole’ of obligatory symbiosis, and are no
longer able to actively grow outside of their host.

Functional homogeneity between the symbiotic MOX from the two sponge
species
Comparative genomics revealed that the MOX symbionts from the two sponge
species were similar in most of their core metabolic pathways. 1042 genes were
common to their core genome, while 372 and 357 genes were unique to
H. (S.) methanophila and
I. methanophila symbionts, respectively
(Supplementary Figure
S6). The main fraction of the genomic content unique to each symbiont
consisted of poorly-annotated open reading frames (ORFs), primarily including
mobile elements and phage-derived sequences, often stabilized by toxin-antitoxin
systems [82]. These toxin-antitoxin
systems are abundant in the genomes of all sequenced aerobic methanotrophs and
account for a significant part of their genomic variability (Figure 5a). Only three sets of genes with
well-described metabolic functions were present in the genomes of the
H. (S.) methanophila MOX,
but appear to be absent in those of the I.
methanophila MOX: i) genes encoding a urease and urea
transporter, ii) a gene encoding a C4-dicarboxylate transporter and iii) a
secondary metabolite synthesis cluster, most likely an aryl polyene of unknown
function [83], (Supplementary Figure S7).
No genes with a well-described metabolic function were found that were unique to
the I. methanophila MOX in comparison to the
H. (S.) methanophila MOX.

Eukaryote-like proteins are encoded in the genomes of the sponge MOX
The genomes of the sponge MOX symbionts contained 823 genes that were
unique to the symbionts from both sponge species, and not present in free-living
relatives (97 of which belong the sponge MOX symbiont core genome, see Supplementary Note 3 for
more details). Some of these symbiont-specific sequences were ORFs as large as
14.6 kb, and contained one or more eukaryotic-like domains (ELD), such as
leucine-rich repeats, cadherin-like domains, and bacterial immunoglobulin-like
domains (Supplementary Table
S3, Supplementary Figure S8). ORFs with multiple ELDs are well known
from intracellular bacterial pathogens and have also been regularly found in the
bacterial metagenomes of other sponge species, where they encode eukaryote-like
proteins (ELPs), which are likely involved in symbiotic interactions with their
hosts (e.g. [84]). In the MOX symbionts
of H. (S) methanophila, some of the ELPs
contained autotransporter beta-domains. These are known from many gram-negative
bacteria, and encode a protein involved in forming a pore through the outer
membrane [85]. This suggests that the
ELPs could be secreted, providing further evidence for their potential role in
symbiont-host interactions. BLAST analysis of the sponge MOX symbiont ELPs
against the NCBI database resulted in best hits to the ELPs in the
Cycloclasticus symbionts of the Campeche sponges (e.g.
ORU94421.1, 98% identity and 78% coverage compared to the 14.6 kb ORF from the
H. (S.) methanophila
MOX). The similarity of ELPs from symbionts that inhabit the same host but
belong to very distant bacterial lineages suggests the convergent evolution of
these putative symbiosis factors.

The symbiotic MOX appear to be the primary source of sponge carbon
Given the high abundances of MOX symbionts in both Campeche sponge
species, we hypothesized that they play an important role in their nutrition. To
test this hypothesis, we analyzed phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs) and sterols
in the sponges (see Supplementary Note 4 for more details). Monounsaturated fatty acids
known to be specific to MOX [86],
comprised 27% of all lipids of H. (S.)
methanophila and 14% of all lipids in I.
methanophila individuals, confirming high abundances of symbiotic
MOX in both host species (Table 2).
Carbon isotopic signatures of these fatty acids reflected those of Campeche
methane (δ13Cmethane was between −50 and
−45‰, [32],
δ13CSpongeMOXfattyacids was between −51
and −44‰, Supplementary Table S3). This suggests that in contrast to
cultivated type I methanotrophs [87,
88], the sponge MOX symbionts, as
well as the mussel symbionts [86], do not
fractionate methane carbon during the biosynthesis of their fatty acids,
possibly due to periodic methane limitation.

We were able to trace elongation of the MOX-specific fatty acids
n-C16:1ω8 and
n-C16:1ω7 to
n-C18, n-C20,
n-C22, n-C24,
n-C26 with the same double bond positions and
similar isotopic signatures in H. (S.)
methanophila. This indicates that carbon compounds from the
MOX symbionts were incorporated into their host's biomass (Table 2, Supplementary Table S3).
I. methanophila also showed a similar chain-elongation
pattern, however, the double bond positions were not exclusively ω8 and
ω7, suggesting a lower degree of carbon incorporation from its MOX
symbionts than in H. (S.)
methanophila. Given the very low isotopic values of most
sponge-derived lipid biomarkers, methane appears to be the main carbon source of
the Campeche sponges, and we hypothesize that the majority of the
methane-derived carbon in the sponges originates from their symbionts (Supplementary Note
5).

Conclusions
Our study revealed that two, only distantly related, species of sponges
independently established highly specific, nutritional symbioses with two very
closely related MOX bacteria. This convergence in symbiont acquisition
underscores the strong selective advantage for these sponges in harboring MOX
bacteria in the food-limited deep sea: These animals gain access to a carbon and
energy source, methane, that they cannot access on their own. For the symbionts,
one of the main advantages is that the sponges provide them with simultaneous
and continuous access to both methane and oxygen via active water pumping and
high surface to volume ratios. In contrast, free-living methanotrophs are
limited to a very narrow range of habitats in which methane and oxygen
co-occur.

Most research on symbioses between MOX bacteria and eukaryotes has
focused on MOX from the MMG1 clade that have, so far, only been found in
Bathymodiolus mussels. In contrast, only little is known
about the symbioses between MOX from the MMG2 clade and their hosts. The
diversity of hosts that these MMG2 MOX are associated with, ranging from
ciliates to sponges, lobster and tubeworms, is only beginning to be recognized.
Our study provides multifaceted insights into the genomic and metabolic
potential of MMG2 MOX symbionts from deep-sea, seep sponges. Future studies of
MMG2 MOX from other host groups will allow comparative analyses of the traits
that have enabled these bacteria to independently colonize eukaryotic hosts
multiple times in convergent evolution.

Supplementary Material
3  4  Suppl Figures  Supplementary Information  Acknowledgments
The authors thank all individuals who helped during the R/V Meteor research cruise
M114, including onboard technical and scientific personnel, the captain and crew,
and the ROV MARUM-Quest team. We thank the Max Planck-Genome-Centre Cologne
(http://mpgc.mpipz.mpg.de/home/) for generating the metagenomic and
the metatranscriptomic data used in this study, the Imaging Core Facility at the
University of Würzburg, Germany for embedding of the TEM samples, the Central
Microscopy unit at the University of Kiel, Germany for access to their electron
microscope facilities, and Ralf Lendt (University of Hamburg) for compound-specific
carbon isotope measurements. We thank Bram Vekeman for providing the genomes from
the MMG2 North Sea enrichments. The Campeche Knoll cruise was funded by the German
Research Foundation (DFG – Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft). Additional
support was provided through the MARUM DFG-Research Center / Excellence Cluster
“The Ocean in the Earth System” at the University of Bremen. We are
grateful to the Mexican authorities for granting permission to conduct this research
in the southern Gulf of Mexico (permission of DGOPA: 02540/14 from 5 November 2014).
This study was funded by the Max Planck Society, the MARUM DFG-Research Center /
Excellence Cluster “The Ocean in the Earth System” at the University
of Bremen, an ERC Advanced Grant (BathyBiome, 340535) and a Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation Marine Microbial Initiative Investigator Award to ND (Grant GBMF3811),
the DFG Collaborative Research Center 1182 'Origin and Function of
Metaorganisms to UH and ND, and the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program to PC and UH under Grant Agreement No. 679849
(‘SponGES’). CPA was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the
Alexander von Humboldt Foundation.


          Author Contributions
        

MRB, CPA, DB, JP, DB, HS, UH and ND conceived the study. HS provided the
framework for deep-sea sample collections. YM and IMD provided in situ
documentation. MRB, CPA, LS, YCW, CMP, DB, JP and PC analyzed the samples. MRB
wrote the manuscript with contributions from all co-authors.


          Conflict of interest
        

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Figure 1 The encrusting sponge Hymedesmia (Stylopus)
methanophila sp. nov. and the branching sponge
Iophon methanophila sp. nov. colonize asphalt seeps at
Campeche Knolls. a, Geographic location of Campeche Knolls and the sponge
collection sites, Chapopote and Mictlan. b, MARUM-QUEST ROV image of
H. (S.) methanophila and
I. methanophila at Chapopote. Galatheid crabs graze on the
sponges.

Figure 2 Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) images of the symbiotic
methane-oxidizing bacteria (MOX) in Campeche sponges. FISH was performed with a
probe specific to the symbiotic MOX on 10 μm thick sections of I.
methanophila and H. (S.)
methanophila. Colors: MOX symbionts, magenta; DNA
(DAPI-staining), blue; autofluorescence at ~520 nm with ~490 nm
excitation (FITC filter), green. a, Overview of I.
methanophila. The image is a mosaic of five aligned images (lines mark
borders between the images). b, Overview of H.
(S.) methanophila. The image is a mosaic
of twenty aligned images (lines mark borders between the images,
e: embryos in various developmental stages. c, MOX
symbionts are abundant in the mesohyl of I. methanophila. d,
Detail of embryos labeled e1 and e2 in panel
b. e, FISH images of embryo labeled e2 in panel b using grey
intensity representation to distinguish FISH signal of MOX symbionts (top panel)
from DAPI staining (middle panel) and autofluorescence (bottom panel). Images
from the mosaics, additional images of MOX in tissues of H.
(S.) methanophila embryos and
3-dimensional z-stack reconstructions are available at https://figshare.com/projects/Fueled_by_methane_Deep-sea_sponges_from_asphalt_seeps_gain_their_nutrition_from_methane-oxidizing_symbionts/23020.

Figure 3 Transmission electron microscopy images of H.
(S.) methanophila. a, Symbiotic
methane-oxidizing bacteria (MOX) are abundant in the mesohyl, particularly in
regions close to the choanocyte chambers (chambers not visible in image),
sp=sponge cells, n=nucleus. b,
High-resolution image of white box labeled b from panel a, showing intracellular
membranes (arrows) typical for MOX. The MOX at the lower half of the image are
dividing; bc = bacteria with a different morphology than the
MOX symbionts. c, MOX symbiont in a lysosome of an amebocyte, l
= lysosome. d, Mesohyl with an embryo surrounded by symbiotic MOX, and a
bacteriocyte containing bacteria with a different morphology than the symbiotic
MOX (bc). e, MOX symbionts within an embryo.
he = heterogeneous yolk. f, A bacteriocyte containing
bacteria with a different morphology than the MOX symbionts. bc
= bacteria; n = nucleus.

Figure 4 Phylogenomic tree and metabolic repertoire of the sponge MOX symbionts and
related bacteria (45 sequences total). The sponge MOX symbionts and the two
free-living MOX from North Sea sediment enrichments (provided by B. Vekeman) are
currently the only genomes available for the MMG (Marine Methylotrophic Group)
2, although 16S rRNA data indicates that they are widespread (see Supplementary Figure S3
16S rRNA tree). Eighteen single-copy markers as defined in the AMPHORA core
bacterial phylogenetic marker database were used in the analysis. The tree is
drawn to scale, with branch lengths representing the number of substitutions per
site. The percentage of trees in which the associated taxa clustered together
was determined based on 100 bootstrap resamples. The analysis included 3,706
positions. *These clades were formerly included in the family Methylococcaceae,
and recently placed together with the MMG1 and MMG2 clades within the family
‘Methylomonadaceae’ (order Methylococcales), based on the Genome
Taxonomy Database.

Figure 5 Comparison of genomes from the sponge symbionts and other gammaproteobacterial
methane-oxidizing bacteria (MOX). a, Distribution of estimated
genome sizes, guanine-cytosine (GC) content and the estimated number of
toxin-antitoxin components in genomes of methane-oxidizing bacteria (MOX). The
blue and red lines show pan genomes (blue) versus core genome (red) development
plots (obtained by iteratively adding one genome at a time to the comparison in
the defined order (starting with the first genome from the left). Comparative
genomic analysis led to a pan-genome estimate of 16476 coding sequences, of
which 1050 formed the core genome. The gradual change in the slope of the pan
genome development curve for the MMG 2 symbionts suggests that this clade is
sufficiently sampled. 163 genes were subtracted from the core genome of
'Methylomonadaceae' after addition of the sponge symbionts. Mbp =
million base pairs. b, Principal component analysis based on the
relative abundance of clusters of orthologous groups (COGs) encoded by symbiotic
and free-living MOX. The following COG abbreviations are shown: [D] cell cycle
control, cell division, chromosome partitioning, [M] cell wall/membrane/envelope
biogenesis, [N] cell motility, [O] post-translational modification, protein
turnover, and chaperones, [T] signal transduction mechanisms, [U] intracellular
trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport, [V] defense mechanisms, [A] RNA
processing and modification, [J] translation, ribosomal structure and
biogenesis, [K] transcription, [L] replication, recombination and repair, [C]
energy production and conversion, [E] amino acid transport and metabolism, [F]
nucleotide transport and metabolism, [G] carbohydrate transport and metabolism,
[H] coenzyme transport and metabolism, [I] lipid transport and metabolism, [P]
inorganic ion transport and metabolism, [Q] secondary metabolites biosynthesis,
transport, and catabolism, [S] function unknown.

Figure 6 Central carbon and nitrogen metabolism in the sponge MOX symbionts. The
reconstruction is based on the genomes of I. methanophila and
H. (S.) methanophila
symbionts and on the average expression in the two transcriptomes of
H. (S.) methanophila
symbionts. Boxes represent enzyme subunits and the abbreviations represent the
genes that encode the respective subunit. Boxes are colored according to the
expression value of the gene. The following genes are abbreviated:
pmoABC, particulate methane monooxygenase subunits A, B and
C; xoxF, methanol dehydrogenase; fae,
formaldehyde activating enzyme; mtdB, methylene
tetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase; mch,
methenyltetrahydromethanopterin cyclohydrolase; fhcABCD,
formyltransferase/hydrolase complex; fdhAB, formate
dehydrogenase subunits alpha and beta; mtdA, methylene
tetrahydrofolate/methylene tetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase;
ftfL, formate--tetrahydrofolate ligase;
hps, 3-hexulose-6-phosphate synthase; hpi,
6-phospho-3-hexuloisomerase; pfk, pyrophosphate-dependent
phosphofructokinase; fbp, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase;
fba, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase; tpi,
triosephosphate isomerase; tkt, transketolase;
talB, transaldolase; rpe,
ribulose-phosphate 3-epimerase; rpiA, ribose-5-phosphate
isomerase; gpi, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase;
zwf, glucose-6-phosphate 1-dehydrogenase;
pgl, 6-phosphogluconolactonase; gndA,
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase; gapdh, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase; pgk, phosphoglycerate kinase;
gpml, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate-independent phosphoglycerate
mutase; eno, enolase; pyk, pyruvate kinase;
por, pyruvate-flavodoxin oxidoreductase;
dlat, acetyltransferase component of pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex; dld; dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase of pyruvate or
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complexes; pdhA1, pyruvate
dehydrogenase E1 component subunit alpha; oadABG, oxaloacetate
decarboxylase, alpha, beta and gamma chains; pgm,
phosphoglucomutase; glgC, glucose-1-phosphate
adenylyltransferase; glgA, glycogen synthase;
glgB, 1,4-alpha-glucan branching enzyme;
smht, serine hydroxymethyltransferase;
agt/sgaA, serine-glyoxylate
aminotransferase; mclA, malyl-CoA lyase;,
mtkAB, malate thiokinase, alpha and beta subunits;
mdh, malate dehydrogenase; gltA, citrate
synthase; acn, aconitase; idh, isocitrate
dehydrogenase; sucA, 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase E1 component;
dlst, dihydrolipoyllysine-residue succinyltransferase
component of 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex; sucCD,
succinate-CoA ligase subunits beta and alpha; sdhABCD,
succinate dehydrogenase complex subunits; fumC, fumarate
hydratase; dctMPQ, C4-dicarboxylate TRAP transporter subunits;
gltDB, glutamate synthase, large and small chains;
glnA, glutamine synthetase; amt, ammonium
transporter; nrt, nitrate transporter; nirBD,
assimilatory nitrite reductase small and large subunits;
narGHIJ, respiratory nitrate reductase, alpha-gamma
subunits; urtABCDE, urea ABC transport system subunits;
ureABCDEFG, urease subunits; atpABCDEFGH,
subunits of the membrane-bound ATP synthase; cox123, cytochrome
c oxidase subunit I-III; cytc1, cytochrome c-1, cytochrome b-c1
complex; urc1, cytochrome b-c1 complex subunit 1;
cytb, cytochrome b, cytochrome b-c1 complex.

Table 1 Relative abundance and phylogenetic assignment of sponge-associated bacteria
based on metagenomic and metatranscriptomic coverage of their 16S rRNA gene
sequences and the coverage of metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs).
Classifications at the Phylum level are mentioned in parentheses. The following
names are abbreviated: H. (S.)
methanophila from Mictlan (HmetMict) and Chapopote
(HmetChap); I. methanophila from Chapopote
subsamples 1 and 2 (ImetChap1 and ImetChap2); methane oxidizing bacteria (MOX);
marine methylotrophic group 2 (MMG2). Numbers in parentheses within the column
headers represent the ratio between the MOX 16S and the host’s 18S rRNA
gene coverage. * E01-9C-26 marine group is a monophyletic
‘sponge-enriched’ gammaproteobacterial clade. ** Aqs2 symbiont is
a monophyletic ‘sponge-enriched’ clade of Proteobacteria, which
includes symbionts of the low microbial abundance sponges Amphimedon
queenslandica and Crambe crambe.

	16S rRNA gene coverage		average MAG coverage	

              
            		
              
            	
DNA		RNA						

              
            						
HmetMict
(2.7)	HmetChap
(1.0)	ImetChap1
(0.4)	ImetChap2
(0.8)		HmetMict
(1.6)	HmetChap
(5.6)		HmetMict	HmetChap	ImetChap1	ImetChap2	
MOX (MMG2, Proteobacteria)	58.8	50.4	58.1	52.5		42.8	37.6		67.6	52.1	45.3	35.9	
Thioglobaceae - SUP05 (Proteobacteria)	5.7	6.9	12.4	14.8		6.8	7.3		4.6	5.2	17.0	20.2	
Cycloclasticus (Proteobacteria)	10.8	6.2	6.5	5.1		8.9	1.8		7.9	8.4	6.7	6.0	
E01-9C-26 marine group* (Proteobacteria)	6.3	14.8	0.6	0		10.0	10.0		14.8	21.6	0	0	
JTB23 (Proteobacteria)	10.9	11.9	10.7	12.9		8.5	5.3		1.4	4.3	15.1	18.7	
Nitrosopumilus (Thaumarchaeota)	0.1	3.2	0	0.6		8.1	28.7		0.4	6.2	0	0.9	
Aqs2 Betaproteobacteria** (Proteobacteria)	0	0	6.8	7.5		0	0		0	0	8.6	9.0	
Cytophagales (Bacteroidetes)	0	0	2.6	3.8		0	0		0	0	3.2	4.6	
BD7-8 marine group (Proteobacteria)	3.4	2.9	0	0		7.6	3.0		2.1	1.4	0	0	
Endozoicomonas (Proteobacteria)	2.1	1.2	3.2	2.1		3.2	2.1		0	0	0	0	
KI89A clade ((Proteobacteria))	1.7	1.0	0.3	0.3		3.1	0.9		1.1	0.7	0.4	0.5	
Azospirillum (Proteobacteria)	0.2	1.0	0	0		0.9	2.6		0	0	0	0	
Nitrospina (Nitrospinae)	0	0.4	0	0		0.1	0.6		0	0	0	0	
OCS116 (Proteobacteria))	0	0	1.5	1.3		0	0		0	0	2.0	2.1	
SAR324 (Proteobacteria))	0	0	0.5	0.9		0	0		0	0	0.8	1.3	
Spirochaetales (Spirochaetes)	0	0	0.3	0.2		0	0		0	0	0.4	0.5	

              Bdellovibrio (Proteobacteria)
            	0	0	0.3	0.2		0	0		0	0	0.3	0.2	
													
Color code (%)	≤0	≤10	≤30	≤60									
Table 2 Relative composition of lipid biomarkers and their average δ13C
values in sponge tissue. MOX, methane-oxidizing bacteria; SRB, sulfate-reducing
bacteria; tb, terminally-branched; MUFAs, monounsaturated fatty acids; av.,
average; NM, not measured.

lipid biomarker sources	H. (S.)
methanophila	
              I. methanophila
            	
	
              
            	
	% of all lipids	δ13C (‰) (av.)	% of all lipids	δ13C (‰) (av.)	
	
              
            	
MOX (MUFAs)	27	-46	14	-50	
Sponge (demospongic acids, MUFAs)	28	-47	39	-43	
Sponge (sterols)	29	-41	26	-43	
Various sources (saturated n-fatty
acids)	12	-36	16	-35	
Bacteria, usually SRB (tb fatty acids)	1	NM	1	NM	
Various bacteria (diplopterol)	3	-47	4	-43	

   1 
            Webster NS  
           Cooperation, communication, and co-evolution: Grand challenges in
microbial symbiosis research Front Microbiol 2014 5 164 
2 
            Schmitt S  
            Tsai P  
            Bell J  
            Fromont J  
            Ilan M  
            Lindquist N  
             
           Assessing the complex sponge microbiota: core, variable and
species-specific bacterial communities in marine sponges ISME J 2012 6 564 576 21993395 
3 
            Thomas T  
            Moitinho-Silva L  
            Lurgi M  
            Björk JR  
            Easson C  
            Astudillo-García C  
             
           Diversity, structure and convergent evolution of the global
sponge microbiome Nat Commun 2016 7 11870 
4 
            Taylor MW  
            Radax R  
            Steger D  
            Wagner M  
           Sponge-associated microorganisms: Evolution, ecology, and
biotechnological potential Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007 71 295 347 17554047 
5 
            Gloeckner V  
            Wehrl M  
            Moitinho-silva L  
            Schupp P  
            Pawlik JR  
            Lindquist NL  
             
           The HMA-LMA dichotomy revisited : an electron microscopical
survey of 56 sponge species 2017 227 78 88 
6 
            Webster NS  
            Thomas T  
           The sponge hologenome MBio 2016 7 
7 
            Hentschel U  
            Piel J  
            Degnan SM  
            Taylor MW  
           Genomic insights into the marine sponge
microbiome Nat Rev Microbiol 2012 10 641 654 22842661 
8 
            Wilson MC  
            Mori T  
            Rückert C  
            Uria AR  
            Helf MJ  
            Takada K  
             
           An environmental bacterial taxon with a large and distinct
metabolic repertoire Nature 2014 506 58 62 24476823 
9 
            Burgsdorf I  
            Slaby BM  
            Handley KM  
            Haber M  
            Blom J  
            Marshall CW  
             
           Lifestyle evolution in cyanobacterial symbionts of
sponges MBio 2015 6 e00391 15 26037118 
10 
            Gauthier M-EA  
            Watson JR  
            Degnan SM  
           Draft genomes shed light on the dual bacterial symbiosis that
dominates the microbiome of the coral reef sponge Amphimedon
queenslandica  Front Mar Sci 2016 3 00196 
11 
            Slaby BM  
            Hackl T  
            Horn H  
            Bayer K  
            Hentschel U  
           Metagenomic binning of a marine sponge microbiome reveals unity
in defense but metabolic specialization ISME J 2017 11 2465 2478 28696422 
12 
            Ryu T  
            Seridi L  
            Moitinho-Silva L  
            Oates M  
            Liew YJ  
            Mavromatis C  
             
           Hologenome analysis of two marine sponges with different
microbiomes BMC Genomics 2016 17 158 26926518 
13 
            Fan L  
            Reynolds D  
            Liu M  
            Stark M  
            Kjelleberg S  
            Webster NS  
             
           Functional equivalence and evolutionary convergence in complex
communities of microbial sponge symbionts Proc Natl Acad Sci 2012 109 E1878 E1887 22699508 
14 
            Gao Z-M  
            Wang Y  
            Tian R-M  
            Wong YH  
            Batang ZB  
            Al-Suwailem AM  
             
           Symbiotic adaptation drives genome streamlining of the
cyanobacterial sponge symbiont “Candidatus 
Synechococcus spongiarum.” MBio 2014 5 e00079 14 24692632 
15 
            Lackner G  
            Peters EE  
            Helfrich EJN  
            Piel J  
           Insights into the lifestyle of uncultured bacterial natural
product factories associated with marine sponges Proc Natl Acad Sci 2017 114 E347 E356 28049838 
16 
            Liu M  
            Fan L  
            Zhong L  
            Kjelleberg S  
            Thomas T  
           Metaproteogenomic analysis of a community of sponge
symbionts ISME J 2012 6 1515 1525 22297557 
17 
            Moitinho-Silva L  
            Díez-Vives C  
            Batani G  
            Esteves AI  
            Jahn MT  
            Thomas T  
           Integrated metabolism in sponge–microbe symbiosis revealed
by genome-centered metatranscriptomics ISME J 2017 1651 1666 28338677 
18 
            Fiore CL  
            Labrie M  
            Jarett JK  
            Lesser MP  
           Transcriptional activity of the giant barrel sponge,
Xestospongia muta  holobiont: Molecular evidence for
metabolic interchange Front Microbiol 2015 6 
19 
            Radax R  
            Rattei T  
            Lanzen A  
            Bayer C  
            Rapp HT  
            Urich T  
             
           Metatranscriptomics of the marine sponge Geodia
barretti : Tackling phylogeny and function of its microbial
community Environ Microbiol 2012 14 1308 1324 22364353 
20 
            Moitinho-Silva L  
            Seridi L  
            Ryu T  
            Voolstra CR  
            Ravasi T  
            Hentschel U  
           Revealing microbial functional activities in the Red Sea sponge
Stylissa carter i by metatranscriptomics Environ Microbiol 2014 16 3683 3698 24920529 
21 
            Mori T  
            Cahn JKB  
            Wilson MC  
            Meoded RA  
            Wiebach V  
            Martinez AFC  
             
           Single-bacterial genomics validates rich and varied specialized
metabolism of uncultivated Entotheonella  sponge
symbionts Proc Natl Acad Sci 2018 115 201715496 
22 
            Jørgensen BB  
            Boetius A  
           Feast and famine—microbial life in the deep-sea
bed Nat Rev Microbiol 2007 5 770 781 17828281 
23 
            Vacelet J  
            Duport E  
           Prey capture and digestion in the carnivorous sponge
Asbestopluma hypogea  (Porifera:
Demospongiae) Zoomorphology 2004 123 179 190 
24 
            Verhoeven JTP  
            Kavanagh AN  
            Dufour SC  
           Microbiome analysis shows enrichment for specific bacteria in
separate anatomical regions of the deep-sea carnivorous sponge
Chondrocladia grandis  FEMS Microbiol Ecol 2017 93 fiw214 
25 
            Hestetun JT  
            Dahle H  
            Jørgensen SL  
            Olsen BR  
            Rapp HT  
           The Microbiome and occurrence of methanotrophy in carnivorous
sponges Front Microbiol 2016 7 1781 27881974 
26 
            Arellano SM  
            Lee OO  
            Lafi FF  
            Yang J  
            Wang Y  
            Young CM  
             
           Deep sequencing of Myxilla 
(Ectyomyxilla ) methanophila  an
epibiotic sponge on cold-seep tubeworms, reveals methylotrophic,
thiotrophic, and putative hydrocarbon-degrading microbial
associations Microb Ecol 2013 65 450 461 23052927 
27 
            Tian R-M  
            Zhang W  
            Cai L  
            Wong Y-H  
            Ding W  
            Qian P-Y  
             
           Genome reduction and microbe-host interactions drive adaptation
of a sulfur-oxidizing bacterium associated with a cold seep
sponge mSystems 2017 2 e00184 16 28345060 
28 
            Nishijima M  
            Lindsay DJ  
            Hata J  
            Nakamura A  
            Kasai H  
            Ise Y  
             
           Association of thioautotrophic bacteria with deep-sea
sponges Mar Biotechnol 2010 12 253 260 20221658 
29 
            Petersen JM  
            Wentrup C  
            Verna C  
            Knittel K  
            Dubilier N  
           Origins and evolutionary flexibility of chemosynthetic symbionts
from deep-sea animals Biol Bull 2012 223 123 137 22983038 
30 
            Vacelet J  
            Boury-Esnault N  
            Fiala-Medioni A  
            Fisher CR  
           A methanotrophic carnivorous sponge Nature 1995 377 296 
31 
            Dubilier N  
            Bergin C  
            Lott C  
           Symbiotic diversity in marine animals: the art of harnessing
chemosynthesis Nat Rev Microbiol 2008 6 725 740 18794911 
32 
            Sahling H  
            Borowski C  
            Escobar-Briones E  
            Gaytán-Caballero A  
            Hsu C-W  
            Loher M  
             
           Massive asphalt deposits, oil seepage, and gas venting support
abundant chemosynthetic communities at the Campeche Knolls, southern Gulf of
Mexico Biogeosciences 2016 13 4491 4512 
33 
            Rubin-Blum M  
            Antony CP  
            Borowski C  
            Sayavedra L  
            Pape T  
            Sahling H  
             
           Short-chain alkanes fuel mussel and sponge
Cycloclasticus  symbionts from deep-sea gas and oil
seeps Nat Microbiol 2017 17093 17093 
34 
            Montanaro J  
            Gruber D  
            Leisch N  
           Improved ultrastructure of marine invertebrates using non-toxic
buffers PeerJ 2016 4 e1860 27069800 
35 
            Kumar Y  
            Westram R  
            Kipfer P  
            Meier H  
            Ludwig W  
           Evaluation of sequence alignments and oligonucleotide probes with
respect to three-dimensional structure of ribosomal RNA using ARB software
package BMC Bioinformatics 2006 7 240 16672074 
36 
            Ruff SE  
            Arnds J  
            Knittel K  
            Amann R  
            Wegener G  
            Ramette A  
             
           Microbial communities of deep-sea methane seeps at Hikurangi
continental margin (New Zealand) PLoS One 2013 8 e72627 24098632 
37 
            Duperron S  
            Halary S  
            Lorion J  
            Sibuet M  
            Gaill F  
           Unexpected co-occurrence of six bacterial symbionts in the gills
of the cold seep mussel Idas  sp. (Bivalvia:
Mytilidae) Environ Microbiol 2008 10 433 445 18093159 
38 
            Yılmaz LŞ  
            Noguera DR  
           Development of thermodynamic models for simulating probe
dissociation profiles in fluorescence in situ hybridization Biotechnol Bioeng 2007 96 349 363 16878331 
39 
            Amann RI  
            Blinder BJ  
            Olson RJ  
            Chisholm SW  
            Devereux R  
            Stahl DA  
           Combination of 16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes with flow
cytometry for analyzing mixed microbial populations Appl Environ Microbiol 1990 56 1919 1925 2200342 
40 
            Wallner G  
            Amann R  
            Beisker W  
           Optimizing fluorescent in situ hybridization with rRNA-targeted
oligonucleotide probes for flow cytometric identification of
microorganisms Cytometry 1993 14 136 143 7679962 
41 
            Peng Y  
            Leung HCM  
            Yiu SM  
            Chin FYL  
           IDBA-UD: a de novo assembler for single-cell and metagenomic
sequencing data with highly uneven depth Bioinformatics 2012 28 1420 1428 22495754 
42 
            Seah BKB  
            Gruber-Vodicka HR  
           gbtools: Interactive visualization of metagenome bins in
R Front Microbiol 2015 6 1451 26732662 
43 
            Nurk S  
            Bankevich A  
            Antipov D  
           Assembling genomes and mini-metagenomes from highly chimeric
reads Res Comput Mol Biol 2013 158 170 
44 
            Bankevich A  
            Nurk S  
            Antipov D  
            Gurevich AA  
            Dvorkin M  
            Kulikov AS  
             
           SPAdes: A new genome assembly algorithm and its applications to
single-cell sequencing J Comput Biol 2012 19 455 477 22506599 
45 
            Gurevich A  
            Saveliev V  
            Vyahhi N  
            Tesler G  
           QUAST: quality assessment tool for genome
assemblies Bioinformatics 2013 29 1072 1075 23422339 
46 
            Parks DH  
            Imelfort M  
            Skennerton CT  
            Hugenholtz P  
            Tyson GW  
           CheckM : assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered
from isolates, single cells, and metagenomes Genome Res 2015 25 1043 1055 25977477 
47 
            Liao Y  
            Smyth GK  
            Shi W  
           FeatureCounts: An efficient general purpose program for assigning
sequence reads to genomic features Bioinformatics 2014 30 923 930 24227677 
48 
            Wagner GP  
            Kin K  
            Lynch VJ  
           Measurement of mRNA abundance using RNA-seq data: RPKM measure is
inconsistent among samples Theory Biosci 2012 131 281 285 22872506 
49 
            Grabherr MG  
            Haas BJ  
            Yassour M  
            Levin JZ  
            Thompson DA  
            Amit I  
             
           Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a
reference genome Nat Biotechnol 2011 29 644 652 21572440 
50 
            Li B  
            Dewey CN  
           RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with
or without a reference genome BMC Bioinformatics 2011 12 323 21816040 
51 
            Wu M  
            Scott AJ  
           Phylogenomic analysis of bacterial and archaeal sequences with
AMPHORA2 Bioinformatics 2012 28 1033 1034 22332237 
52 
            Edgar RC  
           MUSCLE: Multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high
throughput Nucleic Acids Res 2004 32 1792 1797 15034147 
53 
            Kumar S  
            Stecher G  
            Tamura K  
           MEGA7: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 7.0 for
bigger datasets Mol Biol Evol 2016 33 msw054 
54 
            Le SQ  
            Gascuel O  
           An Improved General Amino Acid Replacement Matrix Mol Biol Evol 2008 25 1307 1320 18367465 
55 
            Nichols PD  
            Guckert JB  
            White DC  
           Determination of monosaturated fatty acid double-bond position
and geometry for microbial monocultures and complex consortia by capillary
GC-MS of their dimethyl disulphide adducts J Microbiol Methods 1986 5 49 55 
56 
            Brüning M  
            Sahling H  
            MacDonald IR  
            Ding F  
            Bohrmann G  
           Origin, distribution, and alteration of asphalts at Chapopote
Knoll, Southern Gulf of Mexico Mar Pet Geol 2010 27 1093 1106 
57 
            Moitinho-Silva L  
            Steinert G  
            Nielsen S  
            Hardoim CCP  
            Wu YC  
            McCormack GP  
             
           Predicting the HMA-LMA status in marine sponges by machine
learning Front Microbiol 2017 8 1 14 28197127 
58 
            Vacelet J  
            Donadey C  
           Electron microscope study of the association between some sponges
and bacteria J Exp Mar Bio Ecol 1977 30 301 314 
59 
            Maldonado M  
           Intergenerational transmission of symbiotic bacteria in oviparous
and viviparous demosponges, with emphasis on
intracytoplasmically-compartmented bacterial types J Mar Biol Assoc United Kingdom 2007 87 1701 1713 
60 
            Jain C  
            Rodriguez-R LM  
            Phillippy AM  
            Konstantinidis KT  
            Aluru S  
           High-throughput ANI analysis of 90K prokaryotic genomes reveals
clear species boundaries bioRxiv 2017 225342 
61 
            Parks DH  
            Chuvochina M  
            Waite DW  
            Rinke C  
            Skarshewski A  
            Chaumeil P-A  
             
           A standardized bacterial taxonomy based on genome phylogeny
substantially revises the tree of life Nat Biotechnol 2018 36 996 1004 30148503 
62 
            Vekeman B  
            Speth D  
            Wille J  
            Cremers G  
            De Vos P  
            Op den Camp HJM  
             
           Genome characteristics of two novel type I methanotrophs enriched
from North Sea sediments containing exclusively a lanthanide-dependent
XoxF5-type methanol dehydrogenase Microb Ecol 2016 72 503 509 27457652 
63 
            Pasulka AL  
            Goffredi SK  
            Tavormina PL  
            Dawson KS  
            Levin LA  
            Rouse GW  
             
           Colonial tube-dwelling ciliates influence methane cycling and
microbial diversity within methane seep ecosystems Front Mar Sci 2017 3 276 
64 
            Watsuji T  
            Nakagawa S  
            Tsuchida S  
            Toki T  
            Hirota A  
            Tsunogai U  
             
           Diversity and function of epibiotic microbial communities on the
galatheid crab, Shinkaia crosnieri  Microbes Environ 2010 25 288 294 21576884 
65 
            Rodrigues CF  
            Hilário A  
            Cunha MR  
            Weightman AJ  
            Webster G  
           Microbial diversity in Frenulata (Siboglinidae, Polychaeta)
species from mud volcanoes in the Gulf of Cadiz (NE
Atlantic) Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, Int J Gen Mol Microbiol 2011 100 83 98 
66 
            Petersen JM  
            Dubilier N  
           Methanotrophic symbioses in marine invertebrates Environ Microbiol Rep 2009 1 319 335 23765884 
67 
            Vacelet J  
            Fiala-Médioni A  
            Fisher CR  
            Boury-Esnault N  
           Symbiosis between methane-oxidizing bacteria and a deep-sea
carnivorous cladorhizid sponge Mar Ecol Prog Ser 1996 145 77 85 
68 
            Padilla CC  
            Bertagnolli AD  
            Bristow LA  
            Sarode N  
            Glass JB  
            Thamdrup B  
             
           Metagenomic binning recovers a transcriptionally active
gammaproteobacterium linking methanotrophy to partial denitrification in an
anoxic oxygen minimum zone Front Mar Sci 2017 4 23 
69 
            Moran NA  
            Plague GR  
           Genomic changes following host restriction in
bacteria Curr Opin Genet Dev 2004 14 627 633 15531157 
70 
            Moran NA  
            Bennett GM  
           The tiniest tiny genomes Annu Rev Microbiol 2014 68 195 215 24995872 
71 
            Salem H  
            Florez L  
            Gerardo N  
            Kaltenpoth M  
           An out-of-body experience: the extracellular dimension for the
transmission of mutualistic bacteria in insects Proc R Soc B Biol Sci 2015 282 20142957 20142957 
72 
            Wernegreen JJ  
           Endosymbiont evolution: predictions from theory and surprises
from genomes Ann N Y Acad Sci 2015 1360 16 35 25866055 
73 
            Batut B  
            Knibbe C  
            Marais G  
            Daubin V  
           Reductive genome evolution at both ends of the bacterial
population size spectrum Nat Rev Microbiol 2014 12 841 850 25220308 
74 
            Mann S  
            Chen YPP  
           Bacterial genomic G + C composition-eliciting environmental
adaptation Genomics 2010 95 7 15 19747541 
75 
            Anthony C  
           The biochemistry of methylotrophs London, New York, NY Academic Press 1983 
76 
            Kalyuzhnaya MG  
            Yang S  
            Rozova ON  
            Smalley NE  
            Clubb J  
            Lamb a  
             
           Highly efficient methane biocatalysis revealed in a
methanotrophic bacterium Nat Commun 2013 4 2785 
77 
            Ponnudurai R  
            Kleiner M  
            Sayavedra L  
            Petersen JM  
            Moche M  
            Otto A  
             
           Metabolic and physiological interdependencies in the
Bathymodiolus azoricus  symbiosis ISME J 2017 11 463 477 27801908 
78 
            Hendry TA  
            Freed LL  
            Fader D  
            Fenolio D  
            Sutton TT  
            Lopez JV  
           Ongoing transposon-mediated genome reduction in the luminous
bacterial symbionts of deep-sea ceratioid anglerfishes MBio 2018 9 e01033 18 29946051 
79 
            Oakeson KF  
            Gil R  
            Clayton AL  
            Dunn DM  
            Von Niederhausern AC  
            Hamil C  
             
           Genome degeneration and adaptation in a nascent stage of
symbiosis Genome Biol Evol 2014 6 76 93 24407854 
80 
            Kleiner M  
            Young JC  
            Shah M  
            Verberkmoes NC  
            Dubilier N  
           Metaproteomics reveals abundant transposase expression in
mutualistic endosymbionts MBio 2013 4 16 18 
81 
            Kleiner M  
            Wentrup C  
            Lott C  
            Teeling H  
            Wetzel S  
            Young J  
             
           Metaproteomics of a gutless marine worm and its symbiotic
microbial community reveal unusual pathways for carbon and energy
use Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 109 1173 1182 
82 
            Van Melderen L  
           Toxin-antitoxin systems: Why so many, what for? Curr Opin Microbiol 2010 13 781 785 21041110 
83 
            Cimermancic P  
            Medema MH  
            Claesen J  
            Kurita K  
            Wieland Brown LC  
            Mavrommatis K  
             
           Insights into secondary metabolism from a global analysis of
prokaryotic biosynthetic gene clusters Cell 2014 158 412 421 25036635 
84 
            Díez-Vives C  
            Moitinho-Silva L  
            Nielsen S  
            Reynolds D  
            Thomas T  
           Expression of eukaryotic-like protein in the microbiome of
sponges Mol Ecol 2017 26 1432 1451 28036141 
85 
            Desvaux M  
            Parham NJ  
            Henderson IR  
           The autotransporter secretion system Res Microbiol 2004 155 53 60 14990256 
86 
            Kellermann MY  
            Schubotz F  
            Elvert M  
            Lipp JS  
            Birgel D  
            Prieto-Mollar X  
             
           Symbiont–host relationships in chemosynthetic mussels: A
comprehensive lipid biomarker study Org Geochem 2012 43 112 124 
87 
            Summons RE  
            Jahnke LL  
            Roksandic Z  
           Carbon isotopic fractionation in lipids from methanotrophic
bacteria: Relevance for interpretation of the geochemical record of
biomarkers Geochim Cosmochim Acta 1994 58 2853 2863 11540111 
88 
            Jahnke LL  
            Summons RE  
            Hope JM  
            Des Marais DJ  
           Carbon isotopic fractionation in lipids from methanotrophic
bacteria II: the effects of physiology and environmental parameters on the
biosynthesis and isotopic signatures of biomarkers Geochim Cosmochim Acta 1999 63 79 93 11541777 

