LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


   00455031920Brain ResBrain Res.Brain research0006-89931872-624029903617600482110.1016/j.brainres.2018.04.004NIHMS960029ArticleRoles for gut vagal sensory signals in determining energy availability and energy expenditure Schwartz Gary J. Ph.D.a
a Department of Medicine &amp; Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Golding 501, Bronx, NY 10461 USA, gary.schwartz@einstein.yu.eduCORRESPONDING AUTHOR, Gary J. Schwartz, Ph.D.a, gary.schwartz@einstein.yu.edu15 4 2018 15 8 2018 15 8 2019 1693 Pt B 151 153 This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.The gut sensory vagus transmits a wide range of meal-related mechanical, chemical and gut peptide signals from gastrointestinal and hepatic tissues to the central nervous system at the level of the caudal brainstem. Results from studies using neurophysiological, behavioral physiological and metabolic approaches that challenge the integrity of this gut-brain axis support an important role for these gut signals in the negative feedback control of energy availability by limiting food intake during a meal. These experimental approaches have now been applied to identify important and unanticipated contributions of the vagal sensory gut-brain axis to the control of two additional effectors of overall energy balance: the feedback control of endogenous energy availability through hepatic glucose production and metabolism, and the control of energy expenditure through brown adipose tissue thermogenesis. Taken together, these studies reveal the pleiotropic influences of gut vagal meal-related signals on energy balance, and encourage experimental efforts aimed at understanding how the brainstem represents, organizes and coordinates gut vagal sensory signals with these three determinants of energy homeostasis.

Graphical abstract



vagusenergy expenditurebrown adipose tissue thermogenesisgut-brain axisgut peptideshepatic glucose production
   Introduction
Body weight and body adiposity are the results of behavioral, physiological and biochemical processes that mediate the availability of nutrients as well as the expenditure of energy. Increases in systemic energy availability primarily result from the ingestion and subsequent absorption of nutrients following a meal, the fundamental behavioral unit of energy intake in humans and mammals. Systemic energy availability is also determined by the de novo generation of fuel, primarily by hepatic metabolism and by the liberation of stored fuel, e.g., free fatty acids, by lipolysis in white adipose tissue. The last decade of research has increasingly demonstrated a significant role for the central nervous system in coordinating energy availability and energy expenditure to determine body weight in adulthood. This central neural coordination requires both sensors of nutrient availability and effectors that respond to feedback signals arising from those sensory systems. Accordingly, the gastrointestinal tract and hepatic portal vein of the liver are richly endowed with sensory innervation arising from visceral afferent fibers that comprise both subdiaphragmatic vagal afferents as well as non-vagal splanchnic afferents (Fox et al., 2000) (Berthoud et al., 1997) (Berthoud et al., 1992) (Berthoud et al., 1995).

The presence of food in the gut during a meal elicits multiple mechanical, nutrient chemical and gut peptide signals in gastrointestinal and hepatic vagal afferents that are important not only in the digestion and absorption of nutrients, but also in the negative feedback control of food intake that limits subsequent nutrient availability. These meal-related gut vagal afferent negative feedback signals are conveyed to the central nervous system at the level of the caudal brainstem, in the region of the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) and the circumventricular area postrema (AP), whose fenestrated capillaries permit enhanced brain parenchymal access to circulating endocrine factors and nutrient feedback signals. Importantly, the NTS is also neurally linked to forebrain hypothalamic, striatal and limbic structures that mediate feeding, as well as to circuits that determine sympathetic and parasympathetic autonomic outflow. Thus NTS/AP is an important candidate site of convergence and integration of nutrient availability signals and is a central node in the neural circuitry that mediates the control of both energy intake and energy expenditure. Taken together, the neurohumoral connections between the gut afferent vagus and the brainstem NTS/ AP form the primary gut-brain axis that ties meal related gut feedback signals to central and peripheral neural pathways to control energy availability and energy expenditure.

Challenges to the gut–brain axis
Results from neurophysiological recordings, surgical and chemical transections, and genetic model studies each reveal the critical roles for meal-related gut vagal afferent feedback signals in the control of energy availability by limiting food intake. In vivo extracellular neurophysiological recording studies of single vagal afferent fibers identify punctate, well-localized gastric and duodenal receptive fields that are rapidly and reversibly activated by multiple meal-related gut stimuli shown to limit food intake during a meal, including: 1) mechanical distension of the gut (Mathis et al., 1998), 2) intestinal infusions of macronutrients, including fat emulsions and fatty acids, carbohydrate solutions, and amino acids or protein solutions (Schwartz and Moran, 1998), 3) and gut satiety peptides such as cholecystokinin (CCK), which is released from gut enteroendocrine cells by the presence of nutrients in the duodenum (Schwartz and Moran, 1994). Interruption of these gut vagal neurophysiological responses, either by surgical transection of gastrointestinal vagal afferents, by local luminal anesthesia using tetracaine, or by gut vagus nerve application of the selective sensory neurotoxin capsaicin, blocks the ability of the above meal-related signals to limit food intake during a meal, and can result in larger and longer meals (Schwartz et al., 1999) (Greenberg et al., 1990) (Moran et al., 1997). Gut vagal afferents express type A CCK receptors (CCKAR) (Corp et al., 1993), and pharmacological blockade of CCKAR using the selective antagonist devazepide increases food intake and prevents the reductions in food intake produced by intestinal infusions of nutrient secretagogues of CCK (Reidelberger et al., 2003). Gut vagal afferent terminations of the gut-brain axis in the brainstem NTS/AP, as well as NTS neurons themselves, each express glutamatergic NMDA receptors, and brainstem pharmacological blockade of these receptors increases food intake and blocks the feeding inhibitory effects of gastrointestinal meal-related negative feedback stimuli (Guard et al., 2009a; Guard et al., 2009b). Finally, genetic absence of CCKA receptors in Long Evans Tokushima Fatty rats leads to obesity secondary to hyperphagia and increased meal size, with no change in meal frequency (Moran et al., 1998). Overall, results from these challenges to the structural and functional integrity of the gut sensory vagus nerve support a potent negative feedback role for food stimulated vagal afferent signals in the control of meal size, nutrient availability, and ultimately energy balance.

Non-canonical roles for gut vagal afferent signaling
The above approaches, developed to identify an important role for gut vagal afferent signaling in the negative feedback control of food intake, have also been fruitfully employed to identify new and unanticipated vagal sensory controls of two other major determinants of energy balance - hepatic metabolism and energy expenditure. Gastrointestinal infusions of lipid emulsions similar to those that are sufficient to reduce meal size also rapidly limit endogenous nutrient availability by suppressing hepatic glucose production (HGP) during a hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (Wang et al., 2008). This suppression is blocked by local gut application of the anesthetic tetracaine, and by selective surgical transection of gastrointestinal vagal afferents. These data demonstrate that intestinal vagal sensory innervation mediates the gastrointestinal control of HGP. At the brainstem level of the gut-brain axis, both fourth ventricular and local parenchymal NTS administration of the non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonist MK801 prevents gut lipid-induced reductions in HGP, as does selective surgical transection of the hepatic branch of the vagus, completing a regulatory loop, whereby the sensing of increased gut nutrient availability acts via a negative feedback gut-brainstem-liver circuit to limit endogenous nutrient availability by suppressing HGP. Subsequent studies have identified a similar pathway mediating the negative feedback control of hepatic metabolism via the nutrient stimulated gut satiety peptide CCK. Results from these studies show that duodenal CCK acts via gut CCKA receptors to reduce HGP. These data support a role for gut CCK as a molecular mediator of the circuit that links increases in gastrointestinal nutrients to decreases in hepatic nutrient availability (Cheung et al., 2009). Importantly, the ability of this gut-brain-liver circuit to reduce HGP is markedly attenuated in diet induced obesity (DIO), demonstrating that metabolic context determines the potency of gut-brain-liver circuitry in the control of nutrient availability. Like DIO, exogenous administration of corticosteroids can induce hepatic insulin resistance, hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia. Selective chemical or surgical interruption of hepatic vagal afferent fibers each block these deleterious hepatic and systemic metabolic consequences (Bernal-Mizrachi et al., 2007). Similarly, genetically-induced hepatic steatosis can be blocked by selective surgical or chemical interruption of hepatic vagal afferent nerves (Uno et al., 2006). Taken together, these findings identify a potent contribution of the gut-brain axis to nutrient availability via hepatic metabolism.

The ingestion of food not only acutely increases nutrient availability, but has also been linked to increases in energy expenditure associated with the metabolic costs of processing and storing nutrients. Most recent results from studies of the gut-brain axis suggest an unexpected ability of gut nutrient sensing to increase energy expenditure via thermogenesis in metabolically active brown adipose tissue (BAT). Duodenal infusions of lipid emulsions at doses that reduce meal size also rapidly increase BAT temperature. As was the case for the gut-brain circuits mediating the negative feedback controls of nutrient availability (by suppressing food intake and limiting hepatic glucose production), the ability of gut nutrient infusions to increase BAT temperature was blocked by local intestinal application of the anesthetic tetracaine, as well as by peripheral administration of the CCKAR devazepide (Blouet and Schwartz, 2012). Furthermore, brainstem parenchymal administration of MK801 blocked gut lipid-induced increases in BAT temperature, supporting the suggestion of a novel gut-brainstem-BAT circuit in mediating energy expenditure via BAT thermogenesis. Interestingly, this circuit appears to extend to include forebrain hypothalamic neurons as well. Gastrointestinal infusions of nutrients, but not non-nutrients, rapidly reduce the neurophysiological activity of a subpopulation of hypothalamic neurons expressing orexigenic agouti related peptide (AGRP) (Beutler et al., 2017), and work of Blouet and colleagues has, in turn, implicated AGRP neuronal activity as an important determinant of BAT thermogenesis (Burke et al., 2017). Activating AGRP neurons reduces sympathetic outflow to BAT and reduces thermogenesis, while inhibiting these neurons leads to increased sympathetic outflow and increased BAT thermogenesis. Furthermore, the gut satiety peptide CCK reduces AGRP neuronal activity, while the gastric feeding stimulatory peptide ghrelin increases AGRP activity (Beutler et al., 2017). Overall, these findings support an emerging role for gut nutrient sensing acting via a gut vagal-NTS circuit involving AGRP neurons to increase energy expenditure.

Summary and perspective
The identification of dense extrinsic vagal sensory innervation of the gastrointestinal tract and liver has fostered experimental efforts to identify and characterize roles for gut vagal afferent signals related to nutrient availability, and roles for these signals in determining overall energy balance. Nutrient stimulation of the gut and gut hormones act via gastrointestinal sensory fibers to limit future nutrient availability by reducing food intake and by reducing endogenous hepatic glucose production. These gut vagal meal-related signals require an intact link to the brainstem NTS/AP to drive changes in food intake and hepatic metabolism. Furthermore, gut vagal nutrients and gut peptide sensing also drive energy expenditure via BAT thermogenesis. These pleiotropic effects of gut vagal nutrient sensing on energy availability and energy expenditure occur rapidly upon gut nutrient exposure, are reversible with time, are blocked by impending gut vagal afferent signals, and depend on the energy balance status of the organism. It is tempting to speculate that these energy availability and energy expenditure effects are actively coordinated by the central nervous system to regulate overall energy balance, either acutely and/or in the long term. Progress in understanding the physiological relevance of these distinct behavioral and metabolic effectors of energy balance will require approaches that can: 1) identify and characterize the distinct neurochemical and neuroanatomical phenotypes of NTS/ AP populations important for the ability of gut nutrients to determine acute feeding, hepatic metabolism and BAT thermogenesis, 2) identify the temporal patterns of activity among NTS neuronal phenotypes during gut nutrient exposure that correlate with its consequences for feeding, hepatic metabolism and BAT thermogenesis, and 3) identify the neuroanatomical relationships among brainstem and hypothalamic neuronal populations implicated in these actions. Data from such studies will provide a foundation for developing more refined, mechanistic hypotheses aimed at establishing the causal neural links between gut nutrient sensing and each of these three determinants of energy balance, and how they are influenced by metabolic status.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


        FUNDING
      

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health DK02054, DK026687, DK105441 to GJS.

Abbreviations
NTSnucleus of the solitary tract

AParea postrema

CCKcholecystokinin

DIOdiet induced obesity

HGPhepatic glucose production

NMDAn-methyl d-aspartate

BATbrown adipose tissue

AGRPAgouti related peptide

HIGHLIGHTS
The gastrointestinal tract and liver are richly innervated with extrinsic vagal sensory fibers

These fibers communicate to the caudal brainstem via the gut-brain axis

Meal-related nutrient and gut peptide stimuli activate gut vagal afferents

Gut vagal nutrient sensing has pleiotropic effects on energy availability and energy expenditure

Gut-brain axis activity affects feeding, hepatic metabolism, and brown adipose tissue thermogenesis


   
            Bernal-Mizrachi C  
             
           2007 An afferent vagal nerve pathway links hepatic PPARalpha activation to glucocorticoid-induced insulin resistance and hypertension Cell Metab 5 91 102 17276352 

            Berthoud HR  
            Kressel M  
            Neuhuber WL  
           1992 An anterograde tracing study of the vagal innervation of rat liver, portal vein and biliary system Anat Embryol (Berl) 186 431 42 1280009 

            Berthoud HR  
             
           1995 Vagal sensors in the rat duodenal mucosa: distribution and structure as revealed by in vivo DiI-tracing Anat Embryol (Berl) 191 203 12 7771683 

            Berthoud HR  
             
           1997 Distribution and structure of vagal afferent intraganglionic laminar endings (IGLEs) in the rat gastrointestinal tract Anat Embryol (Berl) 195 183 91 9045988 

            Beutler LR  
             
           2017 Dynamics of Gut-Brain Communication Underlying Hunger Neuron 96 461 475 e5 29024666 

            Blouet C  
            Schwartz GJ  
           2012 Duodenal lipid sensing activates vagal afferents to regulate non-shivering brown fat thermogenesis in rats PLoS One 7 e51898 23251649 

            Burke LK  
             
           2017 mTORC1 in AGRP neurons integrates exteroceptive and interoceptive food-related cues in the modulation of adaptive energy expenditure in mice Elife 6 

            Cheung GW  
             
           2009 Intestinal cholecystokinin controls glucose production through a neuronal network Cell Metab 10 99 109 19656488 

            Corp ES  
             
           1993 Characterization of type A and type B CCK receptor binding sites in rat vagus nerve Brain Res 623 161 6 8221086 

            Fox EA  
             
           2000 Vagal afferent innervation of smooth muscle in the stomach and duodenum of the mouse: morphology and topography J Comp Neurol 428 558 76 11074451 

            Greenberg D  
            Smith GP  
            Gibbs J  
           1990 Intraduodenal infusions of fats elicit satiety in sham-feeding rats Am J Physiol 259 R110 8 2375420 

            Guard DB  
             
           2009a Blockade of hindbrain NMDA receptors containing NR2 subunits increases sucrose intake Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 296 R921 8 19193935 

            Guard DB  
             
           2009b NMDA NR2 receptors participate in CCK-induced reduction of food intake and hindbrain neuronal activation Brain Res 1266 37 44 19232331 

            Mathis C  
            Moran TH  
            Schwartz GJ  
           1998 Load-sensitive rat gastric vagal afferents encode volume but not gastric nutrients Am J Physiol 274 R280 6 9486282 

            Moran TH  
             
           1997 Vagal afferent and efferent contributions to the inhibition of food intake by cholecystokinin Am J Physiol 272 R1245 51 9140026 

            Moran TH  
             
           1998 Disordered food intake and obesity in rats lacking cholecystokinin A receptors Am J Physiol 274 R618 25 9530226 

            Reidelberger RD  
            Castellanos DA  
            Hulce M  
           2003 Effects of peripheral CCK receptor blockade on food intake in rats Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 285 R429 37 12738611 

            Schwartz GJ  
            Moran TH  
           1994 CCK elicits and modulates vagal afferent activity arising from gastric and duodenal sites Ann N Y Acad Sci 713 121 8 8185153 

            Schwartz GJ  
            Moran TH  
           1998 Duodenal nutrient exposure elicits nutrient-specific gut motility and vagal afferent signals in rat Am J Physiol 274 R1236 42 9644035 

            Schwartz GJ  
             
           1999 Gut vagal afferent lesions increase meal size but do not block gastric preload-induced feeding suppression Am J Physiol 276 R1623 9 10362740 

            Uno K  
             
           2006 Neuronal pathway from the liver modulates energy expenditure and systemic insulin sensitivity Science 312 1656 9 16778057 

            Wang PY  
             
           2008 Upper intestinal lipids trigger a gut-brain-liver axis to regulate glucose production Nature 452 1012 6 18401341 

